524430 TAW0010.1177/2042098614524430Therapeutic Advances in Drug SafetyKE Farsalinos and R Polosa

research-article2014

Review

Ther Adv Drug Saf

2014, Vol. 5(2) 67 –86

DOI: 10.1177/ 
2042098614524430

© The Author(s), 2014.  
Reprints and permissions:  
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/ 
journalsPermissions.nav

Correspondence to: 
Konstantinos E. 
Farsalinos, MD  
Onassis Cardiac Surgery 
Center, Sygrou 356, 
Kallithea 17674, Greece 
kfarsalinos@gmail.com

Riccardo Polosa, PhD  
Centro per la Prevenzione 
e Cura del Tabagismo 
(CPCT) and Institute 
of Internal Medicine, 
Università di Catania, 
Catania, Italy

Safety evaluation and risk assessment of 
electronic cigarettes as tobacco cigarette 
substitutes: a systematic review

Konstantinos E. Farsalinos and Riccardo Polosa

Abstract:  Electronic cigarettes are a recent development in tobacco harm reduction. They 
are marketed as less harmful alternatives to smoking. Awareness and use of these devices 
has grown exponentially in recent years, with millions of people currently using them. This 
systematic review appraises existing laboratory and clinical research on the potential risks 
from electronic cigarette use, compared with the well-established devastating effects of 
smoking tobacco cigarettes. Currently available evidence indicates that electronic cigarettes 
are by far a less harmful alternative to smoking and significant health benefits are expected in 
smokers who switch from tobacco to electronic cigarettes. Research will help make electronic 
cigarettes more effective as smoking substitutes and will better define and further reduce 
residual risks from use to as low as possible, by establishing appropriate quality control and 
standards.

Keywords:  electronic cigarettes, e-liquid, e-vapor, harm reduction, nicotine, safety, tobacco

Introduction
Complete tobacco cessation is the best outcome 
for  smokers.  However,  the  powerful  addictive  
properties of nicotine and the ritualistic behavior 
of  smoking  create  a  huge  hurdle,  even  for  those 
with a strong desire to quit. Until recently, smok-
ers were left with just two alternatives: either quit 
or suffer the harmful consequences of continued 
smoking. This  gloomy  scenario  has  allowed  the 
smoking pandemic to escalate, with nearly 6 mil-
lion deaths annually and a predicted death toll of 
1  billion  within  the  21st  century  [World  Health 
Organization, 2013]. But a third choice, involving 
the use of alternative and much safer sources of 
nicotine with the goal to reduce smoking-related 
diseases is now available: tobacco harm reduction 
(THR) [Rodu and Godshall, 2006].

Electronic  cigarettes  (ECs)  are  the  newest  and 
most  promising  products  for THR  [Polosa  et  al. 
2013b]. They are electrically-driven devices con-
sisting of the battery part (usually a lithium bat-
tery), and an atomizer where liquid is stored and 
is aerosolized by applying energy and generating 
heat to a resistance encircling a wick. The liquid 
used mainly consists of propylene glycol, glycerol, 

distilled water, flavorings (that may or may not be 
approved for food use) and nicotine. Consumers 
(commonly called ‘vapers’) may choose from sev-
eral  nicotine  strengths,  including  non-nicotine 
liquids, and a countless list of flavors; this assort-
ment is a characteristic feature that distinguishes 
ECs  from  any  other THR  products.  Since  their 
invention in 2003, there has been constant inno-
vation  and  development  of  more  efficient  and 
appealing  products.  Currently,  there  are  mainly 
three types of devices available [Dawkins, 2013], 
depicted in Figure 1. (1) First-generation devices, 
generally mimicking the size and look of regular 
cigarettes and consisting of small lithium batteries 
and cartomizers (i.e. cartridges, which are usually 
prefilled  with  a  liquid  that  bathes  the  atomizer). 
Batteries  may  be  disposable  (to  be  used  once 
only)  or  rechargeable.  (2)  Second-generation 
devices, consisting mainly of higher-capacity lith-
ium  batteries  and  atomizers  with  the  ability  to 
refill  them  with  liquid  (sold  in  separate  bottles). 
In  the  most  recent  atomizers  you  can  simply 
change  the  atomizer  head  (resistance  and  wick) 
while  keeping  the  body  of  the  atomizer,  thus 
reducing the operating costs. (3) Third-generation 
devices (also called ‘Mods’, from modifications), 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

67

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 
Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

Figure 1.  Examples of electronic cigarette devices 
currently available on the market.

consisting of very large-capacity lithium batteries 
with  integrated  circuits  that  allow  vapers  to 
change  the  voltage  or  power  (wattage)  delivered 
to the atomizer. These devices can be combined 
with  either  second-generation  atomizers  or  with 
rebuildable atomizers, where the consumers have 
the ability to prepare their own setup of resistance 
and wick.

Awareness and use (vaping) of ECs has increased 
exponentially in recent years. Data obtained from 
the HealthStyles survey showed that, in the US, 
awareness  of  ECs  rose  from  40.9–57.9%  from 
2010 to 2011, with EC use rising from 3.3–6.2% 
over the same time period [King et al. 2013]. In 
the United Kingdom, EC use in regular smokers 
increased  from  2.7%  in  2010  to  6.7%  in  2012 
[Dockrell  et  al.  2013].  Similar  findings  were 
obtained from the International Tobacco Control 
Four-Country  Survey  [Adkison  et  al.  2013].  A 
recent  prospective  study  in  Swiss  army  recruits 
showed that 12% of smokers who tried ECs pro-
gressed to daily use [Douptcheva et al. 2013]. It 
must  be  noted  that  this  increase  in  EC  use  has 
occurred  despite  the  concerns  raised  by  public 
health authorities about the safety and appropri-
ateness of using these products as alternatives to 
smoking  [National  Association  of  Attorneys 
General,  2013;  Food  and  Drug  Administration, 
2009; Mayers, 2009].

The popularity of ECs may be due to their ability 
to deal both with the physical (i.e. nicotine) and 
the behavioral component of smoking addiction. 
In  particular,  sensory  stimulation  [Rose  and 
Levin, 1991] and simulation of smoking behavior 
and  cigarette  manipulation  [Hajek  et  al.  1989] 
are important determinants of a product’s effec-
tiveness  in  reducing  or  completely  substituting 
smoking. These  features  are  generally  absent  in 
nicotine replacement therapies (NRTs) and oral 

medications  for  nicotine  dependence,  whereas 
ECs are unique in that they provide rituals asso-
ciated  with  smoking  behavior  (e.g.  hand-to-
mouth  movement,  visible  ‘smoke’  exhaled)  and 
sensory stimulation associated with it [Farsalinos 
et  al.  2013b]. This  explains  why  these  products 
can  be  effective  in  reducing  consumption  of 
tobacco smoking [Bullen et al. 2013; Caponnetto 
et al. 2013b; Polosa et al. 2011] and are efficient 
as  long-term  substitutes  of  conventional  ciga-
rettes [Farsalinos et al. 2013b].

Methods
For this systematic review (Figure 2), we searched 
the  PubMed  electronic  database  by  using  key-
words  related  to  ECs  and/or  their  combination 
(e-cigarette,  electronic  cigarette,  electronic  nico-
tine delivery systems). We obtained a total of 354 
results, and selected 41 studies we judged relevant 
to  research  on  EC  safety/risk  profile.  Reference 
lists  from  these  studies  were  also  examined  to 
identify  relevant  articles. We  searched  additional 
information  in  abstracts  presented  at  scientific 
congresses  (respiratory,  cardiovascular,  tobacco 
control,  toxicology),  and  in  reports  of  chemical 
analyses on EC samples that were available online. 
We also looked for selected studies on chemicals 
related  to  EC  ingredients  (e.g.  nicotine,  propyl-
ene glycol, glycerol, cinnamaldehyde, microparti-
cles emission, etc.), but not specifically evaluated 
in  EC  research.  In  total,  97  publications  were 
found, from which 15 chemical analyses of single 
or a limited number of EC samples were excluded 
because  they  were  discussed  in  a  review  paper 
[Cahn and Siegel, 2011]. In total, 114 studies are 
cited in this paper. 

Risk differences compared with 
conventional cigarettes and the issue of 
nicotine
Conventional  cigarettes  are  the  most  common 
form of nicotine intake. Smoking-related diseases 
are  pathophysiologically  attributed  to  oxidative 
stress,  activation  of  inflammatory  pathways  and 
the toxic effect of more than 4000 chemicals and 
carcinogens 
smoke 
[Environmental  Protection  Agency,  1992].  In 
addition, each puff contains >1 × 1015 free radi-
cals [Pryor and Stone, 1993]. All of these chemi-
cals  are  emitted  mostly  during  the  combustion 
process,  which  is  absent  in  ECs.  Although  the 
addictive  potential  of  nicotine  and  related  com-
pounds  is  largely  documented  [Guillem  et  al. 

tobacco 

present 

in 

68 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

Figure 2.  Methodology for literature research and selection of studies.

2005], much less dissemination has been given to 
the  notion  that  nicotine  does  not  contribute  to 
smoking-related diseases. It is not classified as a 
carcinogen  by  the  International  Agency  for 
Research  on  Cancer  [WHO-IARC,  2004]  and 
does  not  promote  obstructive  lung  disease.  A 
major misconception, commonly supported even 
by  physicians,  is  that  nicotine  promotes  cardio-
vascular disease. However, it has been established 
that nicotine itself has minimal effect in initiating 
and  promoting  atherosclerotic  heart  disease 
[Ambrose and Barua, 2004]. It does not promote 
platelet aggregation [Zevin et al. 1998], does not 
[Nitenberg  and 
affect  coronary  circulation 
Antony,  1999]  and  does  not  adversely  alter  the 
lipid profile [Ludviksdottir et al. 1999]. An obser-
vational  study  of  more  than  33,000  smokers 
found no evidence of increased risk for myocar-
dial  infarction  or  acute  stroke  after  NRT  sub-
scription,  although  follow  up  was  only  56  days 
[Hubbard et al. 2005]. Up to 5 years of nicotine 
gum use in the Lung Health Study was unrelated 

to  cardiovascular  diseases  or  other  serious  side 
effects [Murray et al. 1996]. A meta-analysis of 35 
clinical trials found no evidence of cardiovascular 
or other life-threatening adverse effects caused by 
nicotine intake [Greenland et al. 1998]. Even in 
patients  with  established  cardiovascular  disease, 
nicotine  use  in  the  form  of  NRTs  does  not 
increase  cardiovascular  risk  [Woolf  et  al.  2012; 
Benowitz  and  Gourlay,  1997].  It  is  anticipated 
that  any  product  delivering  nicotine  without 
involving  combustion,  such  as  the  EC,  would 
confer  a  significantly  lower  risk  compared  with 
conventional cigarettes and to other nicotine con-
taining combustible products.

The  importance  of  using  nicotine  in  the  long-
term was recognized several years ago by Russell, 
indicating  that  the  potential  of  nicotine  delivery 
systems  as  long-term  alternatives  to  tobacco 
should be explored in order to make the elimina-
tion  of  tobacco  a  realistic  future  target  [Russell, 
1991].  However,  current  regulations  restrict  the 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

69

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

long-term  use  of  pharmaceutical  or  recreational 
nicotine  products  (such  as  snus)  [Le  Houezec 
et  al.  2011].  In  other  words,  nicotine  intake  has 
been demonized, although evidence suggests that, 
besides being useful in smoking cessation, it may 
even have beneficial effects in a variety of disor-
ders  such  as  Parkinson’s  disease  [Nielsen  et  al. 
2013],  depression  [McClernon  et  al.  2006], 
dementia  [Sahakian  et  al.  1989]  and  ulcerative 
colitis [Guslandi, 1999]. Obviously, the addictive 
potential is an important factor in any decision to 
endorse  nicotine  administration;  however, 
it 
should be considered as slight ‘collateral damage’ 
with minimal impact to vapers’ health compared 
with  the  tremendous  benefit  of  eliminating  all 
disease-related  substances  coming  from  tobacco 
smoking. In fact, smokers are already addicted to 
nicotine; therefore the use of a ‘cleaner’ form of 
nicotine  delivery  would  not  represent  any  addi-
tional risk of addiction. Surveys have shown that 
ECs are used as long-term substitutes to smoking 
[Dawkins  et  al.  2013;  Etter  and  Bullen,  2012]. 
Although  consumers  try  to  reduce  nicotine  use 
with ECs, many are unable to completely stop its 
intake,  indicating  an  important  role  for  nicotine 
in the ECs’ effectiveness as a smoking substitute 
[Farsalinos et al. 2013b].

Nicotine  overdose  or  intoxication  is  unlikely  to 
occur  with  vaping,  since  the  amount  consumed 
[Farsalinos  et  al.  2013c]  and  absorbed  [Nides 
et al. 2014; Dawkins and Corcoran, 2013] is quite 
low.  Moreover,  although  not  yet  proven,  it  is 
expected that vapers will self-titrate their nicotine 
intake  in  a  similar  way  to  tobacco  cigarettes 
[Benowitz et al. 1998]. Last, but not least, there is 
evidence suggesting that nicotine cannot be deliv-
ered as fast and effectively from ECs compared to 
tobacco  cigarettes  [Farsalinos  et  al.  2014]. 
Therefore, it seems that ECs have a huge theoreti-
cal  advantage  in  terms  of  health  risks  compared 
with conventional cigarettes due to the absence of 
toxic chemicals that are generated in vast quanti-
ties by combustion. Furthermore, nicotine deliv-
ery  by  ECs  is  unlikely  to  represent  a  significant 
safety  issue,  particularly  when  considering  they 
are  intended  to  replace  tobacco  cigarettes,  the 
most efficient nicotine delivery product.

Studies on the safety/risk profile of ECs
Findings  on  the  safety/risk  profile  of  ECs  have 
just started to accumulate. However, this research 
must  be  considered  work  in  progress  given  that 
the safety/risk of any product reflects an evolving 

body of knowledge and also because the product 
itself is undergoing constant development.

Existing  studies  about  the  safety/risk  profile  of 
ECs  can  be  divided  into  chemical,  toxicological 
and clinical studies (Table 1). Obviously, clinical 
studies  are  the  most  informative,  but  also  the 
most demanding because of several methodologi-
cal, logistical, ethical and financial challenges. In 
particular, exploring safety/risk profile in cohorts 
of  well-characterized  users  in  the  long-term  is 
required to address the potential of future disease 
development, but it would take hundreds of users 
to be followed for a substantial number of years 
before any conclusions are made. Therefore, most 
research  is  currently  focused  on  in  vitro  effects, 
with  clinical  studies  confined  into  evaluation  of 
short-term use or pathophysiological mechanisms 
of smoking-related diseases.

Chemical studies
Chemical studies are relatively simple and cheap 
to  perform  and  provide  quick  results.  However, 
there are several disadvantages with this approach. 
Research is usually focused on the known specific 
chemicals (generally those known to be toxic from 
studies  of  cigarette  smoke)  and  fails  to  address 
unknown,  potentially  toxic  contaminants  that 
could be detected in the liquid or the emitted aer-
osol. Problems may also arise from the detection 
of  the  chemicals  in  flavors.  Such  substances, 
although  approved  for  use  in  the  food  industry, 
have  largely  unknown  effects  when  heated  and 
inhaled; thus, information on the presence of such 
substances  is  difficult  to  interpret  in  terms  of  
in vivo effects. In fact, chemical studies do not pro-
vide any objective information about the effects of 
use;  they  can  only  be  used  to  calculate  the  risk 
based  on  theoretical  models  and  on  already  
established  safety  levels  determined  by  health 
authorities.  An  overview  of  the  chemical  studies 
performed on ECs is displayed in Table 2.

Laugesen  performed  the  first  studies  evaluating 
the  chemical  composition  of  EC  aerosols 
[Laugesen, 2008, 2009]. The temperature of the 
resistance of the tested EC was 54oC during acti-
vation, which is approximately 5–10% of the tem-
perature  of  a  burning  tobacco  cigarette.  Toxic 
chemicals  such  as  heavy  metals,  carcinogenic 
polycyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbons  and  phenols 
were  not  detected,  with  the  exception  of  trivial 
amounts of mercury (0.17 ng per EC) and traces 
of  formaldehyde  and  acetaldehyde.  Laugesen 

70 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

Table 1.  Types of studies performed to determine safety and to estimate risk from EC use.

Type of studies

Research subject

Advantages

Disadvantages

Chemical 
studies

Evaluate the chemical 
composition of liquids 
and/or aerosol. Examine 
environmental exposure 
(passive ‘vaping’).

Easier and faster to 
perform. Less expensive. 
Could realistically 
be implemented for 
regulatory purposes.

Toxicological 
studies

Evaluate the effects on cell 
cultures or experimental 
animals.

Provide some information 
about the effects from use.

Clinical studies

Studies on human in vivo 
effects.

Provide definite and 
objective evidence about 
the effects of use.

Usually targeted on specific chemicals. 
Unknown effects of flavorings when inhaled. 
No validated protocols for vapor production. 
Provide no objective evidence about the end 
results (effects) of use (besides by applying 
theoretical models).
Difficult to interpret the results in terms of 
human in vivo effects. More expensive than 
chemical studies. Need to test aerosol and not 
liquid.
Standards for exposure protocols have not been 
clearly defined.
Difficult and expensive to perform. Long-term 
follow up is needed due to the expected lag 
from initiation of use to possible development 
of any clinically evident disease. For now, 
limited to acute effects from use.

evaluated emissions based on a toxicant emissions 
score and reported a score of 0 in ECs compared 
with  a  score  of  100–134  for  tobacco  cigarettes 
(Figure 3). The US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)  also  performed  chemical  analyses  on  18 
commercially  available  products 
in  2009 
[Westenberger,  2009].  They  detected  the  pres-
ence  of  tobacco-specific  nitrosamines  (TSNAs) 
but  did  not  declare  the  levels  found.  Small 
amounts of diethylene glycol were also found in 
one sample, which was unlikely to cause any harm 
from normal use. Another study identified small 
amounts of amino-tandalafil and rimonambant in 
EC liquids [Hadwiger et al. 2010]. Subsequently, 
several 
laboratories  performed  similar  tests, 
mostly on liquids, with Cahn and Siegel publish-
ing a review on the chemical analyses of ECs and 
comparing  the  findings  with  tobacco  cigarettes 
and  other  tobacco  products  [Cahn  and  Siegel, 
2011]. They reported that TSNA levels were simi-
lar  to  those  measured  in  pharmaceutical  NRTs. 
The  authors  concluded  that,  based  on  chemical 
analysis, ECs are far less harmful compared with 
tobacco  cigarettes.  The  most  comprehensive 
study on TSNAs has been performed recently by 
a  South  Korean  group,  evaluating  105  liquids 
obtained  from  local  retailers  [Kim  and  Shin, 
2013]. On average, they found 12.99 ηg TSNAs 
per ml of liquid, with the amount of daily expo-
sure to the users estimated to be similar to users 
of NRTs [Farsalinos et al. 2013d]. The estimated 
daily exposure to nitrosamines from tobacco ciga-
rettes (average consumption of 15 cigarettes per 
day)  is  estimated  to  be  up  to  1800  times  higher 

compared with EC use (Table 3). Etter and col-
leagues  evaluated  the  accuracy  of  nicotine  labe-
ling and the presence of nicotine impurities and 
degradation  products  in  20  EC  liquid  samples 
[Etter et al. 2013]. They found that nicotine levels 
were  85–121%  of  what  was  labeled,  while  nico-
tine  degradation  products  were  present  at  levels 
of 0–4.4%. Although in some samples the levels 
were  higher  than  those  specified  in  European 
Pharmacopoeia,  they  are  not  expected  to  cause 
any measurable harm to users.

Besides the evaluation for the presence of TSNAs, 
analyses have been performed for the detection of 
carbonyl compounds. It is known that the thermal 
degradation of propylene glycol and glycerol can 
lead to the emission of toxic compounds such as 
aldehydes  [Antal  et  al.  1985;  Stein  et  al.  1983]. 
Goniewicz and colleagues evaluated the emission 
of  15  carbonyls  from  12  brands  of  ECs  (mostly 
first-generation) [Goniewicz et al. 2013]. In order 
to  produce  vapor,  researchers  used  a  smoking 
machine  and  followed  a  regime  of  1.8-second 
puffs with a very short 10-second interpuff inter-
val,  which  does  not  represent  realistic  use 
[Farsalinos et al. 2013c]; although the puff dura-
tion  was  low,  interpuff  interval  was  remarkably 
short, which could potentially lead to overheating. 
In addition, the same puff number was used in all 
devices  tested,  although  there  was  a  significant 
difference  in  the  design  and  liquid  content 
between devices. Despite these limitations, out of 
15  carbonyls,  only  3  were  detected  (formalde-
hyde,  acetaldehyde  and  acrolein);  levels  were 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

71

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

Table 2.  Summary of chemical toxicity findings.

Study

What was investigated?

What were the key findings?

Laugesen 
[2009]

Evaluation of 62 toxicants in 
the EC vapour from Ruyan 16 
mg and mainstream tobacco 
smoke using a standard 
smoking machine protocol.

Liquid

N/A

Vapor

No acrolein, but small quantities of 
acetaldehyde and formaldehyde found. 
Traces of TSNAs (NNN, NNK, and NAT) 
detected. CO, metals, carcinogenic PAHs 
and phenols not found in EC vapour. 
Acetaldehyde and formaldehyde from 
tobacco smoke were 55 and 5 times higher, 
respectively.
N/A

N/A

TSNAs and certain tobacco 
specific impurities were 
detected in both products at 
very low levels. Diethylene 
glycol was identified in one 
cartridge.
Small amounts of amino-
tandalafil and rimonambant 
present in all products tested.

TSNAs levels in ECs 500- to 1400-fold lower than those in conventional 
cigarettes and similar to those in NRTs. Other chemicals found very low 
levels, which are not expected to result in significant harm.
N/A

PM fractions were found, but levels were 6–
18 times lower compared with conventional 
cigarettes. Traces of PAHs detected.

Total TSNAs averaged 
12.99 ng/ml EC liquid; daily 
total TSNA exposure from 
conventional cigarettes 
estimated to be up to 1800 
times higher.
The levels of nicotine 
degradation products 
represented 0–4.4% of those 
for nicotine, but for most 
samples the level was 1–2%. 
Neither ethylene glycol 
nor diethylene glycol were 
detected.
N/A

N/A

N/A

Carbonyl compounds (formaldehyde, 
acetaldehyde and acrolein), VOCs (toluene 
and trace levels of xylene), trace levels 
of TSNAs (NNN and NNK) and very low 
levels of metals (cadmium, nickel and lead) 
were found in almost all examined EC 
vapours. Trace amounts of formaldehyde, 
acetaldehyde, cadmium, nickel and lead 
were also detected from the Nicorette 
inhalator. Compared with conventional 
cigarette, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde and 
acrolein were 9–450 times lower; toluene 
levels 120 times lower; and NNN and NNK 
levels 380 and 40 times lower respectively.

(Continued)

http://taw.sagepub.com

Westenberger 
[2009]

Evaluation of toxicants in EC 
cartridges from two popular 
US brands.

Hadwiger 
et al. [2010]

Cahn and 
Siegel [2011]

Pellegrino 
et al. [2012]

Kim and Shin 
[2013]

Evaluation of four refill 
solutions and six replacement 
cartridges advertised 
as containing Cialis or 
rimonambant.
Overview of 16 chemical 
toxicity studies of EC liquids/
vapours.
Evaluation of PM fractions and 
PAHs in the vapour generated 
from cartomizers of an Italian 
EC brand.
TSNAs (NNN, NNK, NAT, and 
NAB) content in 105 refill 
liquids from 11 EC brands 
purchased in Korean shops.

Etter et al. 
[2013]

Nicotine degradation 
products, ethylene glycol and 
diethylene glycol evaluation 
of 20 EC refill liquids from 10 
popular brands

Goniewicz 
et al. [2013]

Vapours generated from 12 
brands of ECs and a medicinal 
nicotine inhaler using a 
modified smoking machine 
protocol

72 

 
Table 2.  (Continued)

Study

What was investigated?

What were the key findings?

Williams et al. 
[2013] 

Vapour generated from 
cartomizers of a popular 
EC brand using a standard 
smoking machine protocol

Liquid

N/A

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

Vapor

Trace levels of several metals (including 
tin, copper, silver, iron, nickel, aluminium, 
chromium, lead) were found, some of them 
at higher level compared with conventional 
cigarettes. Silica particles were also 
detected. Number of microparticles from 
10 EC puffs were 880 times lower compared 
with one tobacco cigarette.

Burstyn 
[2014]

Systematic review of 35 
chemical toxicity studies/
technical reports of EC 
liquids/vapours.

No evidence of levels of contaminants that may be associated with risk to 
health. These include acrolein, formaldehyde, TSNAs, and metals. Concern 
about contamination of the liquid by a nontrivial quantity of ethylene glycol or 
diethylene glycol remains confined to a single sample of an early technology 
product and has not been replicated.

Abbreviations. CO, carbon monoxide; EC, electronic cigarette; NAT, N-Nitrosoanatabine; NNK, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone; 
NNN, N-Nitrosonornicotine; PAHs, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; PM, particulate matter; TSNAs, tobacco-specific nitrosamines; VOCs, vola-
tile organic carbons.

nickel,  cadmium  and  lead  emitted  [Goniewicz 
et  al.  2013];  the  levels  of  nickel  were  similar  to 
those present in a pharmaceutical nicotine inhala-
tor, while lead and cadmium were present at 2–3 
times  higher levels compared with  the  inhalator. 
Still, the absolute levels were very low (few nano-
grams  per  150  puffs).  Williams  et  al.  [2013]  
focused  their  research  on  the  presence  of  heavy 
metals  and  silicate  particles  emitted  from  ECs. 
They  tested  poor  quality  first-generation  cart-
omisers and found several metals emitted in the 
aerosol  of  the  EC,  specifying  that  in  some  cases 
the  levels  were  higher  compared  with  conven-
tional  cigarettes.  As  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  not 
unusual to find trace levels of metals in the vapor 
generated by these products under experimental 
conditions that bear little relevance to their nor-
mal  use;  however,  it  is  unlikely  that  such  small 
amounts  pose  a  serious  threat  to  users’  health. 
Even if all the aerosol was absorbed by the con-
sumer  (which  is  not  the  case  since  most  of  the 
aerosol is visibly exhaled), an average user would 
be exposed to 4–40 times lower amounts for most 
metals  than  the  maximum  daily  dose  allowance 
from  impurities  in  medicinal  products  [US 
Pharmacopeia, 2013]. Silicate particles were also 
found  in  the  EC  aerosol.  Such  particles  come 
from the wick material, however the authors did 
not  clarify  whether  crystalline  silica  oxide  parti-
cles were found, which are responsible for respira-
tory disease. In total, the number of microparticles 
(< 1000 nm) estimated to be inhaled by EC users 
from  10  puffs  were  880  times  lower  compared 

Figure 3.  Toxic emissions score, adjusted for 
nicotine, for electronic cigarette and popular cigarette 
brands. (Reproduced with permission from Laugesen 
[2009]).

9–450 times lower compared with emissions from 
tobacco  cigarettes  (derived  from  existing  litera-
ture  but  not  tested  in  the  same  experiment). 
Formaldehyde and acetaldehyde were also emit-
ted from the nicotine inhalator, although at lower 
levels. In addition, they examined for the presence 
of  11  volatile  organic  carbons  and  found  only 
trace levels of toluene (at levels from 0.2–6.3 µg 
per  150  puffs)  and  xylene  (from  0.1–0.2  µg  per 
150  puffs)  in  10  of  the  samples;  toluene  levels 
were 120 times lower compared with tobacco cig-
arettes (again derived from existing literature but 
not tested in the same experiment).

Given that ECs have several metal parts in direct 
contact  with  the  e-liquid,  it  is  quite  obvious  to 
expect  some  contamination  with  metals  in  the 
vapor. Goniewicz and colleagues examined sam-
ples  for  the  presence  of  12  metals  and  found 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

73

 
Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

Table 3.  Levels of nitrosamines found in electronic and tobacco cigarettes. Prepared based on information from Laugesen [2009], 
Cahn and Siegel [2011] and Kim and Shin [2013].

Product

Total nitrosamines levels (ng)

Daily exposure (ng)

Ratio4

Electronic cigarette (per ml)
Nicotine gum (per piece)
Winston (per cigarette)
Newport (per cigarette)
Marlboro (per cigarette)
Camel (per cigarette)

    13
      2
3365
3885
6260
5191

521
482
50 4753
50 7753
93 9003
77 8653

1
0.92

971
976
1806
1497

1Based on average daily use of 4ml liquid
2Based on maximum recommended consumption of 24 pieces per day
3Based on consumption of 15 cigarettes per day
4 Difference (number-fold) between electronic cigarette and all other products in daily exposure to nitrosamines

with one tobacco cigarette. Similar findings con-
cerning microparticles were reported by Pellegrino 
and colleagues who found that, for each particu-
late  matter 
fraction,  conventional  cigarettes 
released  6–18  times  higher  amounts  compared 
with the EC tested [Pellegrino et al. 2012].

Burstyn has recently reviewed current data on the 
chemistry  of  aerosols  and  the  liquids  of  ECs 
(including reports which were not peer-reviewed) 
and  estimated  the  risk  to  consumers  based  on 
workplace  exposure  standards  (i.e.  Threshold 
Limit  Values  [TLVs])  [Burstyn,  2014].  After 
reviewing  all  available  evidence,  the  author  con-
cluded  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  vaping 
produced inhalable exposure to contaminants of 
aerosol  that  would  warrant  health  concerns.  He 
added  that  surveillance  of  use  is  recommended 
due  to  the  high  levels  of  propylene  glycol  and 
glycerol  inhaled  (which  are  not  considered  con-
taminants  but  ingredients  of  the  EC  liquid). 
There are limited data on the chronic inhalation 
of these chemicals by humans, although there is 
some evidence from toxicological studies (which 
are discussed later in this paper).

In  conclusion,  chemical  studies  have  found  that 
exposure to toxic chemicals from ECs is far lower 
compared  with  tobacco  cigarettes.  Besides  com-
paring  the  levels  of  specific  chemicals  released 
from  tobacco  and  ECs,  it  should  be  taken  into 
consideration that the vast majority of the >4000 
chemicals  present  in  tobacco  smoke  are  com-
pletely absent from ECs. Obviously, surveillance 
of use is warranted in order to objectively evaluate 
the in vivo effects and because the effects of inhal-
ing flavoring substances approved for food use are 
largely unknown.

Toxicological studies
To  date,  only  a  handful  of  toxicological  studies 
have been performed on ECs, mostly cytotoxicity 
studies on established cell lines. The cytotoxicity 
approach  also  has  its  flaws.  Findings  cannot  be 
directly applied to the in vivo situation and there 
is always the risk of over- (as well as under-)esti-
mating  the  interpretation  of  the  toxic  effects  in 
these investigational models. An ample degree of 
results variability is to be expected from different 
cell  lines  and,  sometimes,  also  within  the  same 
cell  line.  Comparing  the  potential  cytotoxicity 
effects of EC vapor with those resulting from the 
exposure  of  cigarette  smoke  should  be  manda-
tory,  but  standards  for  vapor  production  and 
exposure protocols have not been clearly defined.

Bahl and colleagues [Bahl et al. 2012] performed 
cytotoxicity  tests  on  36  EC  liquids,  in  human 
embryonic  stem  cells,  mouse  neural  stem  cells 
and human pulmonary fibroblasts and found that 
stem cells were more sensitive to the effects of the 
liquids,  with  15  samples  being  moderately  cyto-
toxic  and  12  samples  being  highly  cytotoxic. 
Propylene glycol and glycerol were not cytotoxic, 
but  a  correlation  between  cytotoxicity  and  the 
number and height of the flavoring peaks in high-
performance  liquid  chromatography  was  noted. 
Investigations were just restricted to the effect of 
EC liquids and not to their vapors, thus limiting 
the importance of the study findings; this is not a 
trivial issue considering that the intended use of 
these products is by inhalation only and that it is 
unlikely  that  flavoring  substances  in  the  EC  liq-
uids will still be present in the aerosol in the same 
amount  due  to  differences  in  evaporation  tem-
perature [Romagna et al. 2013]. Regrettably, a set 
of  experiments  with  cigarette  smoke  extracts  as 

74 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

comparator was not included. Of note, the authors 
emphasized that the study could have underesti-
mated the cytotoxicity by 100 times because when 
they  added  the  EC  liquids  to  the  cell,  medium 
final concentration was 1%. However, cells were 
cultured  for  48  hours  with  continuous  exposure 
to the liquid, while in real use the lungs come in 
contact with aerosol instead of liquid, the contact 
lasts  for  1–2  seconds  per  puff  and  most  of  the 
aerosol  is  visibly  exhaled.  Finally,  Cinnamon 
Ceylon, the liquid found to be mostly cytotoxic in 
this  study,  was  not  a  refill  liquid  but  a  concen-
trated flavor which is not used in ECs unless it is 
diluted to 3–5%.

Romagna  and  colleagues  [Romagna  et  al.  2013] 
performed the first cytotoxicity study of EC vapor 
on fibroblast cells. They used a standardized ISO 
10993-5  protocol,  which  is  used  for  regulatory 
purposes  of  medical  devices and  products. They 
tested the vapor of 21 liquid samples containing 
the  same  amount  of  nicotine  (9  mg/ml),  gener-
ated by a commercially available EC device. Cells 
were  incubated  for  24  hours  with  each  of  these 
vapors and with smoke from a conventional ciga-
rette. Only one sample was found to be margin-
ally cytotoxic, whereas cigarette smoke was highly 
cytotoxic (approximately 795% more cytotoxic), 
even when the extract was diluted up to 25% of 
the original concentration.

The  same  group  also  investigated  the  cytotoxic 
potential  of  20  EC  liquid  samples  in  cardiomyo-
blasts [Farsalinos et al. 2013a]. Vapor was produced 
by  using  a  commercially  available  EC  device. 
Samples  contained  a  wide  range  of  nicotine  con-
centrations. A base liquid mixture of propylene gly-
col and glycerol (no nicotine and no flavorings) was 
also included as an additional experimental control. 
Four of the samples examined were made by using 
cured tobacco leaves in a steeping process, allowing 
them to impregnate a mixture of propylene glycol 
and  glycerol  for  several  days  before  being  filtered 
and bottled for use. Of note, this was the first study 
which evaluated a limited number of samples with 
an EC device delivering higher voltage and energy 
to the atomizer (third-generation device). In total, 
four samples were found to be cytotoxic; three of 
them  were  liquids  made  by  using  cured  tobacco 
leaves,  with  cytotoxicity  observed  at  both  100% 
and 50% extract concentration, while one sample 
(cinnamon  flavor)  was  marginally  cytotoxic  at 
100%  extract  concentration  only.  In  comparison, 
smoke  from  three  tobacco  cigarettes  was  highly 
cytotoxic,  with  toxicity  observed  even  when  the 

extract  was  diluted  to  12.5%. The  samples  made 
with tobacco leaves were three times less cytotoxic 
compared with cigarette smoke; this was probably 
due to the absence of combustion and the signifi-
cantly lower temperature of evaporation in EC use. 
Concerning high-voltage EC use, the authors found 
slightly  reduced  cell  viability  without  any  of  the 
samples  being  cytotoxic  according  to  the  ISO 
10993-5 definition. Finally, no association between 
cell survival and the amount of nicotine present in 
the liquids was noted.

A recent study evaluated in more detail the cyto-
toxic potential of eight cinnamon-flavored EC liq-
uids in human embryonic stem cells and human 
pulmonary  fibroblasts  [Behar  et  al.  2014].  The 
authors  found  that  the  flavoring  substance  pre-
dominantly present was cinnamaldehyde, which is 
approved for food use. They observed significant 
cytotoxic effects, mostly on stem cells but also on 
fibroblasts,  with  cytotoxicity  associated  with  the 
amount of cinnamaldehyde present in the liquid. 
However, major methodological issues arose from 
this  study.  Once  again,  cytotoxicity  was  just 
restricted  to  EC  liquids  and  not  to  their  vapors. 
Moreover, the authors mentioned that the amount 
of cinnamaldehyde differed between liquids by up 
to 100 times, and this raises the suspicion of test-
ing  concentrated  flavor  rather  than  refills.  By 
searching the internet and contacting manufactur-
ers, based on the names of samples and suppliers 
mentioned in the manuscript, it was found that at 
least four of their samples were not refills but con-
centrated flavors. Surprisingly, the levels of cinna-
maldehyde found to be cytotoxic were about 400 
times lower than those currently approved for use 
[Environmental Protection Agency, 2000].

Few animal studies have been performed to eval-
uate the potential harm of humectants in EC liq-
uids  (i.e.  propylene  glycol  and  glycerol)  when 
given  by  inhalation.  Robertson  and  colleagues 
tested the effects on primates of inhaling propyl-
ene glycol vapor for several months and found no 
evidence of  toxicity on  any  organ  (including  the 
lungs) after post-mortem examination of the ani-
mals  [Robertson  et  al.  1947].  Similar  observa-
tions were made in a recent study in rats and dogs 
[Werley et al. 2011]. Concerns have been raised in 
human use, based on studies of people exposed to 
theatrical  fog  [Varughese  et  al.  2005;  American 
Chemistry  Council,  2003]  or  propylene  glycol 
used  in  the  aviation  industry  [Wieslander  et  al. 
2001].  Irritation  of  the  respiratory  tract  was 
found,  but  no  permanent  lung  injury  or  other 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

75

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

long-term  health  implications  were  detected.  It 
should be reminded that, in these circumstances, 
nonpharmaceutical  purity  propylene  glycol  is 
used and in some cases oils are added, making it 
difficult to interpret the results in the context of 
EC  use.  Evidence  for  the  potential  harm  of 
inhaled glycerol is sparse. A study using Sprague–
Dawley  rats  found  minimal  to  mild  squamous 
metaplasia  of  the  epiglottis  epithelium  in  the 
high-dose  group  only,  without  any  changes 
observed  in  lungs  or  other  organs  [Renne  et  al. 
1992].  No  comparative  set  of  experiments  with 
cigarette smoke was included, but it is well known 
that exposure to tobacco smoke in similar animal 
models  leads  to  dramatic  changes  in  the  lungs, 
liver and kidneys [Czekaj et al. 2002].

In  conclusion,  toxicological  studies  have  shown 
significantly  lower  adverse  effects  of  EC  vapor 
compared with cigarette smoke. Characteristically, 
the studies performed by using the liquids in their 
original  liquid  form  have  found  less  favorable 
results;  however,  no  comparison  with  tobacco 
smoke was performed in any of these studies, and 
they  cannot  be  considered  relevant  to  EC  use 
since the samples were not tested in the form con-
sumed  by  vapers.  More  research  is  needed, 
including  studies  on  different  cell  lines  such  as 
lung  epithelial  cells.  In  addition,  it  is  probably 
necessary  to  evaluate  a  huge  number  of  liquids 
with different flavors since a minority of them, in 
an  unpredictable  manner,  appear  to  raise  some 
concerns  when  tested  in  the  aerosol  form  pro-
duced by using an EC device.

Clinical studies and research surveys
Clinical  trials  can  be  very  informative,  but  they 
require monitoring of hundreds of users for many 
years to adequately explore the safety/risk profile 
of the products under investigation. Research sur-
veys of EC users, on the other hand, can quickly 
provide information about the potential harm of 
these  products  and  are  much  cheaper  to  run. 
However,  self-reported  data,  highly  self-selected 
study populations, and the cross-sectional design 
are  some  of  the  most  common  limitations  of 
research  surveys. Taken  together,  findings  from 
surveys  and  follow-up  studies  of  vapers  have 
shown that EC use is relatively safe.

Polosa and colleagues followed up smokers for 24 
months,  after  a  6-month  period  of  intervention 
during which ECs were given [Polosa et al. 2013a]. 
Only  mild  symptoms  such  as  mouth  and  throat 

irritation and dry cough were observed. Farsalinos 
and  colleagues  retrospectively  evaluated  a  group 
of 111 EC users who had completely quit smoking 
and were daily EC users for a median period of 8 
months [Farsalinos et al. 2013b]. Throat irritation 
and cough were the most commonly reported side 
effects.  Similar  findings  have  been  observed  in 
surveys  [Dawkins  et  al.  2013;  Etter  et  al.  2011]. 
However, it is expected that dedicated users who 
have  more  positive  experiences  and  fewer  side 
effects compared with the general population par-
ticipate  in  such  studies,  therefore  interpretation 
should be done with caution. The only two exist-
ing randomized controlled trials have also included 
detailed  EC  safety  analysis.  The  ECLAT  study 
[Caponnetto  et  al.  2013b],  a  three-arm,  con-
trolled, randomized, clinical trial designed to com-
pare efficacy and safety of a first-generation device 
with 7.2, 5.4, or 0 mg nicotine cartridges, reported 
clinically  significant  progressive  health  improve-
ments already  by  week  two of  continuous  use of 
the  device,  and  no  serious  adverse  events  (i.e. 
major depression, abnormal behavior or any event 
requiring an unscheduled visit to the family prac-
titioner  or  hospitalization)  occurred  during  the 
study. The ASCEND study [Bullen et al. 2013], a 
three-arm,  controlled,  randomized,  clinical  trial 
designed  to  compare  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  a 
first-generation device (with or without nicotine) 
with nicotine patches, reported no serious adverse 
events in any of the three study groups.

Few clinical studies have been performed to evalu-
ate the short-term in vivo effects of EC use in cur-
rent  or  former  smokers. Vardavas  and  colleagues 
evaluated  the  acute  effects  of  using  an  EC  for  5 
minutes  on  respiratory  function  [Vardavas  et  al. 
2012]. Although they did not report the results of 
they 
commonly-used  spirometry  parameters, 
found that a sensitive measure of airways resistance 
and  nitric  oxide  levels  in  exhaled  breath  were 
adversely affected. Similar elevations in respiratory 
resistance were reported by other research groups 
[Palamidas  et  al.  2013;  Gennimata  et  al.  2012], 
who  also  documented  some  bizarre  elevation  in 
exhaled carbon monoxide levels after EC use; this 
finding has been challenged by several other stud-
ies [Farsalinos et al. 2013f; Nides et al. 2014; Van 
Staden et al. 2013]. Schober and colleagues found 
that  EC  use  led  to  elevated  exhaled  nitric  oxide 
[Schober  et  al.  2013],  contradicting  the  findings 
from  Vardavas  and  colleagues  [Vardavas  et  al. 
2012]. Characteristically, none of the above studies 
performed  any  comparative  tests  after  smoking 
tobacco  cigarettes.  Flouris  and  colleagues  found 

76 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

that only smoking had an acute adverse effect on 
respiratory function [Flouris et al. 2013]; no differ-
ence was observed after the group of smokers was 
exposed to active or passive EC use.

lipoid  pneumonia.  Only  oil-based  liquids  could 
be  the  cause  for  this  condition;  such  liquids 
should not be used with ECs.

Two studies have evaluated the short-term effects 
of  ECs  on  the  cardiovascular  system.  Farsalinos 
and colleagues evaluated the acute effects of using 
ECs with an 11 mg/ml nicotine-containing liquid 
on  hemodynamics  and  left  ventricular  function, 
in comparison with the effects of cigarette smok-
ing [Farsalinos et al. 2012]. They found that EC 
use resulted in a slight elevation in diastolic blood 
pressure  while,  after  smoking,  both  systolic  and 
diastolic blood pressure and heart rate were sig-
nificantly elevated. Obviously, this was due to the 
relatively low nicotine content of the EC (which is 
considered medium strength). Diastolic dysfunc-
tion  was  observed  in  smokers  after  smoking, 
which  was  in  line  with  findings  from  previous 
studies.  However,  no  adverse  effects  were 
observed in EC users after using the device ad lib 
for 7 minutes. Another study by the same group 
[Farsalinos  et  al.  2013f],  evaluated  the  acute 
effects of EC use on coronary flow. In particular, 
they measured the flow velocity reserve of the left 
anterior descending coronary artery by echocar-
diography  after  intravenous  infusion  of  adeno-
sine, representing the maximal ability of the artery 
to deliver blood to the myocardium. Smoking was 
associated with a decline in flow velocity reserve 
by 16% and an elevation in resistance to flow by 
19%. On the contrary, no difference was observed 
in  any  of  these  parameters  after  using  the  EC. 
Blood carboxyhemoglobin levels were also meas-
ured in participants; baseline values were signifi-
cantly  higher  in  smokers  compared  with  vapers 
and were further elevated after smoking but were 
not altered after EC use. Similar observations for 
carboxyhemoglobin  levels  were  observed  by Van 
Staden and colleagues [Van Staden et al. 2013]. 

to 

A clinical case report of a smoker suffering from 
chronic  idiopathic  neutrophilia  was  published. 
According 
that  report  [Farsalinos  and 
Romagna, 2013], switching from smoking to EC 
use  led  to  a  reversal  of  the  condition  after  6 
months.  In  addition,  C-reactive  protein  levels, 
which were consistently elevated for more than 6 
years,  decreased  to  normal  levels.  Another  case 
report  of  a  patient  with  lipoid  pneumonia  was 
published, with the condition attributed to glyc-
erin-based  EC  liquids  used  by  the  patient 
[McCauley et al. 2012]. However, glycerin is an 
alcohol (polyol) and thus it is impossible to cause 

One study evaluated the acute effects of tobacco 
and  EC  use  on  white  blood  cell  count  [Flouris 
et  al.  2012].  Smoking  one  tobacco  cigarette 
caused  an  immediate  elevation  in  white  blood 
cells,  neutrophils  and  lymphocytes,  indicating 
acute inflammatory distress. On the contrary, no 
differences were observed after using ECs.

In  conclusion,  clinical  studies  evaluating  the 
effects of short-term EC use on selected cardio-
vascular  and  respiratory  functional  outcomes 
have  shown  that  even  if  some  harmful  effects  of 
vaping are reported, these are considerably milder 
compared  with  smoking  conventional  cigarettes. 
However,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  prognostic 
implications of these studies; longer-term data are 
needed before any definite conclusions are made.

Passive vaping
Passive smoking is an established risk factor for a 
variety  of  diseases  [Barnoya  and  Navas-Acien, 
2013].  Therefore,  it  is  important  from  a  public 
health perspective to examine the impact of EC use 
on  bystanders.  Indirect  data  can  be  derived  from 
chemical studies in vapor mentioned above, which 
show  that  the  potential  of  any  significant  adverse 
effects on bystanders is minimal. In fact, since side-
stream  exposure  is  nonexistent  in  EC  (aerosol  is 
produced only during activation of the device, while 
tobacco cigarettes emit smoke even when no puffs 
are taken), such studies are undoubtedly overesti-
mating the risk of environmental exposure.

Few studies have focused on second-hand vaping. 
McAuley  and  colleagues  [McAuley  et  al.  2012], 
although mentioning indoor air quality in the title 
of their study and finding minimal health-related 
impact, did not in fact evaluate second-hand vap-
ing  because  aerosol  was  produced  from  an  EC 
device and was evaluated without previously being 
inhaled  by  any  user.  Moreover,  there  were  some 
problems  with  cross-contamination  with  tobacco 
cigarette smoke, which made the results somewhat 
questionable, at least for some of the parameters 
tested.  Schripp  and  colleagues  [Schripp  et  al. 
2013] evaluated the emissions from an EC by ask-
ing a volunteer to use three different EC devices in 
a  closed  8  m3  chamber.  From  a  selection  of  20 
chemicals  analyzed,  only  formaldehyde,  acrolein, 
isoprene,  acetaldehyde  and  acetic  acid  were 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

77

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

detected. The levels were 5–40 times lower com-
pared  with  emissions  from  a  conventional  ciga-
rette.  For  formaldehyde,  the  authors  specifically 
mentioned that the levels were continuously rising 
from  the  time  the  volunteer  entered  the  room, 
even before he started using the EC. Moreover, no 
acute  elevation  was  observed  when  the  smoker 
used the three EC devices, contrary to the acute 
elevation and spiking of levels when a tobacco cig-
arette was lit. The authors concluded that formal-
dehyde was not emitted from the ECs but was due 
to  human  contamination,  since  low  amounts  of 
formaldehyde of endogenous origin can be found 
in  exhaled  breath  [Riess  et  al.  2010].  Romagna 
and  colleagues  [Romagna  et  al.  2012]  evaluated 
chemicals released in a realistic setting of a 60 m3 
room, by asking five smokers to smoke ad lib for 5 
hours and five vapers to use ECs ad lib for a similar 
period of time on two separate days. Nicotine, acr-
olein,  toluene,  xylene  and  polycyclic  aromatic 
hydrocarbons were detected in room air after the 
smoking session, with the amount of total organic 
carbon  (TOC)  reaching  to  6.66  mg/m3.  In  con-
trast,  after  the  EC  session,  only  glycerol  was 
detected in minimal levels (72 µg/m3), while TOC 
level  of  0.73  mg/m3. 
reached  a  maximum 
Characteristically,  the  amount  of TOC  accumu-
lated  after  5  hours  of  EC  use  was  similar  to  the 
amount  found  after  just  11  minutes  of  smoking. 
The study on heavy metals mentioned previously 
[Williams et al. 2013] could also be used to exam-
ine  any  potential  risk  of  bystanders’  exposure  to 
toxic metals. The levels of heavy metals found in 
vapor were minimal, and considering the disper-
sion of these molecules in the whole room air, it is 
unlikely that any of these metals could be present 
in  measurable  quantities  in  the  environment. 
Therefore, the risk for bystanders would be liter-
ally  nonexistent.  Contrary  to  that,  Schober  and 
colleagues [Schober et al. 2013] found that levels 
of aluminum were raised by 2.4 times in a 45 m3 
room where volunteers were asked to use ECs for 
2 hours. This is a highly unexpected finding which 
cannot be supported by the findings of the study 
by Williams and colleagues [Williams et al. 2013]; 
because  the  levels  found  in  the  latter  could  not 
result in such elevation of the environmental levels 
of  aluminum,  unless  nothing  is  retained  in  or 
absorbed from the lungs. Moreover, Schober and 
colleagues [Schober et al. 2013] found that levels 
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were 
raised  by  20%  after  EC  use.  However,  a  major 
methodological problem of this study is that con-
trol environmental measurements were performed 
on a separate day and not on the same day of EC 

use. This is a major limitation, because the levels 
of  environmental  PAHs  have  significant  diurnal 
and day-to-day variations [Ravindra et al. 2008]; 
therefore, it is highly likely that the differences in 
levels  of  PAHs  (which  are  mainly  products  of 
combustion  and  are  not  expected  to  be  emitted 
from EC use) represented changes due to environ-
mental  conditions  and  not  due  to  EC  use. 
Bertholon and colleagues [Bertholon et al. 2013] 
examined the EC aerosol exhaled from a user, in 
comparison  with  exhaled  smoke  from  a  smoker. 
The  authors  found  that  particle  size  diameters 
were 0.29–0.033µm. They observed that the half 
life of EC aerosol was 11 seconds compared with 
20  minutes  for  cigarette  smoke,  indicating  that 
risk  of  passive  vaping  exposure  is  significantly 
lower compared with passive smoking.

The  recent  findings  by  Czogala  and  colleagues 
[Czogala  et  al.  2013]  led  to  similar  conclusions. 
The authors compared the emissions of electronic 
and conventional cigarettes generated by experi-
enced  dual  users  in  a  ventilated  full-sized  room 
and found that ECs may emit detectable amounts 
of nicotine (depending on the specific EC brand 
tested),  but  no  carbon  monoxide  and  volatile 
organic  carbons.  However,  the  average  ambient 
levels of nicotine of ECs were 10 times lower than 
those of conventional cigarettes (3.32 ± 2.49 ver-
sus 31.60 ± 6.91 μg/m3).

In his review and comparison with TLVs, Burstyn 
found  that  emissions  from  ECs  to  the  environ-
ment  are  not  expected  to  pose  any  measurable 
risk for bystanders [Burstyn, 2014].

An issue that needs further clarification relates to 
the findings of microparticles emitted from ECs. In 
most studies, these findings are presented in a way 
implying that the risk is similar to environmental or 
smoking microparticles. In reality, it is not just the 
size but the composition of the microparticles that 
matters.  Environmental  microparticles  are  mainly 
carbon,  metal,  acid  and  organic  microparticles, 
many  of  which  result  from  combustion  and  are 
commonly  called  particulate  matter.  Particulate 
matter  exposure  is  definitely  associated  with  lung 
and  cardiovascular  disease  [Peters,  2005;  Seaton 
et al. 1995]. In the case of ECs, microparticles are 
expected  to  consist  mostly  of  propylene  glycol, 
glycerol,  water  and  nicotine  droplets.  Metal  and 
silica nanoparticles may also be present [Williams 
et al. 2013], but, in general, emissions from ECs are 
incomparable to environmental particulate matter 
or cigarette smoke microparticles.

78 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

Flouris and colleagues [Flouris et al. 2013] per-
formed the only clinical study evaluating the res-
piratory effects of passive vaping compared with 
passive  smoking.  Researchers  found  significant 
adverse  effects  in  spirometry  parameters  after 
being  exposed  to  passive  smoking  for  1  hour, 
while no adverse effects were observed after expo-
sure to passive vaping.

Although evaluating the effects of passive vap-
ing requires further work, based on the existing 
evidence  from  environmental  exposure  and 
chemical analyses of vapor, it is safe to conclude 
that  the  effects  of  EC  use  on  bystanders  
are  minimal  compared  with  conventional 
cigarettes.

Miscellaneous safety issues

Specific subpopulations: psychiatric and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder 
patients
A  challenging  population  subgroup  with  unique 
smoking  patterns  is  that  of  psychiatric  patients 
and  in  particular  schizophrenic  patients.  This 
subpopulation  is  characterized  by  a  very  high 
smoking  prevalence  [De  Leon  and  Diaz,  2005] 
with  an  excess  of  smoking-related  mortality 
[Brown  et  al.  2000].  Currently,  only  NRTs  are 
recommended  to  treat  nicotine  dependence  in 
this  specific  subpopulation,  but  in  general  they 
are not particularly effective [Aubin et al. 2012]. 
ECs  could  be  used  as  an  alternative  to  smoking 
products  in  this  group.  Caponnetto  and  col-
leagues  performed  a  prospective  12-month  pilot 
study to evaluate the efficacy of EC use in smok-
ing  reduction  and  cessation  in  a  group  of  14 
patients  with  schizophrenia  [Caponnetto  et  al. 
2013a].  In  50%  of  participants,  smoking  con-
sumption went from 30 to 15 cigarettes per day at 
52 weeks of follow up, while 14.3% managed to 
quit  smoking.  Importantly,  no  deterioration  in 
their psychiatric condition was observed, and side 
effects were mild and temporary. The results were 
promising  although  an  outdated  EC  device  was 
used in this study.

There  is  also  anecdotal  evidence  that  successful 
smoking cessation could be attained by using an 
EC in smokers with other psychiatric conditions 
such  as  depression  [Caponnetto  et  al.  2011a]. 
Both patients described in this case series stated 
that  EC  use  was  well  tolerated  and  no  adverse 
events were reported.

Considering  that  first-line  oral  medications  for 
nicotine  addiction  are  contraindicated  in  such 
patients  (prescribing  information  for  bupropion 
and  varenicline  carry  a  ‘black-box’  warning  for 
certain  psychiatric  conditions),  ECs  may  be  a 
in  these  challenging  patient 
promising  tool 
groups.

Another  subpopulation  that  may  benefit  from 
regular EC use is that of respiratory patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
a progressive disease characterized by a persistent 
inflammatory  response  to  tobacco  smoke  that 
generally  leads  to  decline  in  lung  function,  res-
piratory 
failure,  cor  pulmonale  and  death. 
Consequently,  smoking  cessation  plays  a  crucial 
part  in  the  management  of  COPD  patients. 
However,  the  available  evidence  in  the  medical 
literature  indicates  that  COPD  patients  who 
smoke  respond  poorly  to  smoking  cessation 
efforts [Schiller and Ni, 2006]. To date, no formal 
efficacy and safety assessment of EC use in COPD 
patients  has  been  conducted. There  is  only  evi-
dence  from  a  case  report  of  inveterate  smokers 
with COPD and a documented history of recur-
ring relapses, who eventually quit tobacco smok-
ing  on  their  own  by  using  an  EC  [Caponnetto 
et al. 2011b]. Significant improvement in quality 
of  life  and  reduction  in  the  number  of  disease 
exacerbations were noted. EC use was well toler-
ated with no reported adverse events.

Accidental nicotine exposure
Accidental  ingestion  of  nicotine,  especially  by 
children,  or  skin  contact  with  large  amounts  of 
liquid  or  highly  concentrated  nicotine  solution 
can  be  an  issue.  However,  the  historically  refer-
enced lethal dose of 60 mg has recently been chal-
lenged  in  a  review  by  Mayer  [Mayer,  2013];  he 
found that the lethal levels currently reproduced 
in  every  document  originated  from  dubious 
experiments  performed  in  the  19th  century. 
Based on post-mortem studies, he suggested that 
the  acute  dose  associated  with  a  lethal  outcome 
would be 500–1000 mg. Taking into account that 
voluminous vomiting is the first and characteristic 
symptom  of  nicotine  ingestion,  it  seems  that  far 
higher  levels  of  nicotine  need  to  be  ingested  in 
order to have lethal consequences.

A surveillance system of adverse events has been 
developed  by  the  FDA,  which  identifies  safety 
concerns  in  relation  to  tobacco  products.  Since 
2008,  47  adverse  events  were  reported  for  ECs 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

79

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

[Chen, 2013]. Eight of them were serious events 
such as hospitalizations for pneumonia, heart fail-
ure, seizures and hypotension and burns. A case 
of second-degree burns was caused by a battery 
explosion, which is generally a problem observed 
in  lithium  batteries  and  has  occurred  in  other 
products  (such  as  mobile  phones).  The  author 
emphasized  that  the  reported  events  were  not 
necessarily associated with EC use but may have 
been  related  to  pre-existing  conditions  or  other 
causes. No condition was characteristically asso-
ciated with EC use.

A recent review of the California Poison Control 
System database from 2010 to 2012 identified 35 
cases (14 children) associated with EC exposure 
(accidental  exposure  in  25  cases)  [Cantrell, 
2013]. A total of five patients were evaluated in an 
emergency  department  and  all  were  discharged 
within  4  hours.  Nausea,  vomiting,  dizziness  and 
oral  irritation  were  most  commonly  reported. 
Taken together, data from surveillance systems of 
adverse  events  suggest  that  short-term  adverse 
effects and accidental exposures to EC cartridges 
are unlikely to result in serious toxicity.

Notwithstanding,  avoiding  preventable  contact 
with  highly  concentrated  nicotine  solution 
remains important; this can be achieved by spe-
cific  labeling  of  the  products,  child-proof  caps 
and proper education of consumers. There is no 
evidence  that  nicotine-containing  EC  liquids 
should be treated in any different way compared 
with other consumer products used every day in 
households  (such  as  bleach,  washing  machine 
powder, etc.).

Electrical accidents and fires
The  electronic  equipment  of  ECs  may  be  the 
cause for accidents. ECs are mainly composed of 
lithium  batteries.  There  have  been  reports  of 
explosions  of  batteries,  caused  either  by  pro-
longed charging and use of improper chargers or 
by design defects. Similar accidents have occurred 
with  batteries  of  other  popular  devices,  such  as 
mobile  phones.  Therefore,  this  does  not  occur 
specifically with ECs, however, quality standards 
of  production  should  be  used  in  order  to  avoid 
such accidents.

Smoking  is  a  major  cause  of  residential  fires. 
Between  2008  and  2010,  an  estimated  annual 
average of 7600 smoking-related fires occurred in 
the  US  [US  Fire 
in 
residential  buildings 

Administration, 2012]. They account for only 2% 
of all residential building fires but for 14% of fire 
deaths.  Since  ECs  are  activated  only  when  used 
by the person and there is no combustion involved, 
there is the potential to avoid the risk of smoking-
related fires.

Use by youngsters and nonsmokers
Although  beyond  the  scope  of  this  review,  it  is 
important to briefly discuss the potential for addic-
tion from EC use. It should be acknowledged that 
nicotine is addictive, although recent studies have 
shown  that  several  other  chemicals  present  in 
tobacco are associated with a significant enhance-
ment  of  the  addictiveness  of  nicotine  [Lotfipour 
et al. 2011; Rose, 2006; Guillem et al. 2005]. Still, 
nicotine  intake  should  not  be  recommended  to 
nonsmokers. Smokers are already addicted to nic-
otine, thus ECs will be a cleaner form of nicotine 
intake,  while  at  the  same  time  they  will  maintain 
their sensory stimulation and motor simulation of 
smoking; these are important aspects of the addic-
tion  to  smoking.  Regulatory  authorities  have 
expressed concern about EC use by youngsters or 
by never-smokers, with ECs becoming a gateway 
to smoking or becoming a new form of addiction. 
However,  such  concerns  are  unsubstantiated; 
research has shown that EC use by youngsters is 
virtually  nonexistent  unless  they  are  smokers. 
Camenga  and  colleagues  [Camenga  et  al.  2013] 
examined the use of ECs and tobacco in a group of 
adolescents, in a survey conducted in three waves. 
In  the  first  wave  of  the  survey  (February  2010), 
1719 adolescents were surveyed from which only 
one nonsmoker was found to be using ECs. In the 
second  and  third  wave  of  the  surveys,  only  five 
nonsmoking adolescents were using ECs. In fact, 
these are adolescents who reported first ever use of 
ECs  in  the  past  30  days;  therefore  they  were  not 
necessarily  regular  or  daily  EC  consumers.  The 
increased prevalence of EC use from 0.9% in 2010 
to 2.3% in 2011 concerned smoking adolescents, 
therefore it should be considered a positive finding 
that  smokers  are  experimenting  with  the  signifi-
cantly less harmful ECs. Similarly, the Medicines 
and  Healthcare  Products  Regulatory  Agency 
(MHRA) found that less than 1% of EC users are 
never-smokers  [MHRA,  2013].  Data  from  the 
Centers for Disease Control [2013] National Youth 
Tobacco Survey reported doubling in EC experi-
mentation by 13–18 year old students from 1.1% 
in 2011 to 2.1% in 2012; however, 90.6% of them 
were  smokers.  From  the  whole  population,  only 
0.5%  were  nonsmokers  experimenting  with  ECs. 

80 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

Once  again,  participants  were  asked  about  ever 
experimenting with an EC in the past 30 days, not 
regular or daily EC use. Recently, a survey of more 
than  75,000  students  in  South  Korea  was  pub-
lished [Lee et al. 2013]. Although they found that 
12.6%  of  them  were  daily  smokers  (8.6%  were 
using only tobacco cigarettes and 3.6% were using 
both tobacco and ECs), only 0.6% of nonsmokers 
had  used  ECs  in  the  past  30  days. Although  the 
above  mentioned  data  have  been  used  as  argu-
ments to support the fact that a new epidemic of 
nicotine  addiction  through  the  use  of  ECs  is 
appearing,  in  reality  they  are  showing  that  any 
experimentation  with  ECs  is  done  by  smokers. 
This is in fact a positive finding, and could lead to 
reduced smoking prevalence through adoption of 
EC  use. Therefore,  ECs  could  serve  as  gateway 
from smoking; on the contrary, there is no evidence 
indicating that they could be a gateway to smoking. 
It is promising to see that penetration of EC use in 
youngsters is virtually nonexistent, especially when 
you take into consideration that there is currently 
no official regulation in most countries to prohibit 
the access to ECs by youngsters.

et al. 2010; Yudkin et al. 2003]. Nonetheless, more 
research is needed in several areas, such as atom-
izer design and materials to further reduce toxic 
emissions and improve nicotine delivery, and liq-
uid  ingredients  to  determine  the  relative  risk  of 
the  variety  of  compounds  (mostly  flavorings) 
inhaled. Regulations need to be implemented in 
order to maintain the current situation of minimal 
penetration of EC use in nonsmokers and young-
sters,  while  manufacturers  should  be  forced  to 
provide  proof  for  the  quality  of  the  ingredients 
used  and  to  perform  tests  on  the  efficiency  and 
safety of their products. However, any regulatory 
decisions  should  not  compromise  the  variability 
of  choices  for  consumers  and  should  make  sure 
that  ECs  are  more  easily  accessible  compared 
with their main competitor, the tobacco cigarette. 
Consumers deserve, and should make, informed 
decisions  and  research  will  definitely  promote 
this. In particular, current data on safety evalua-
tion  and  risk  assessment  of  ECs  is  sufficient 
enough to avert restrictive regulatory measures as 
a consequence of an irrational application of the 
precautionary principle [Saitta et al. 2014].

Conclusion
Existing evidence indicates that EC use is by far a 
less  harmful  alternative  to  smoking. There  is  no 
tobacco and no combustion involved in EC use; 
therefore, regular vapers may avoid several harm-
ful toxic chemicals that are typically present in the 
smoke  of  tobacco  cigarettes.  Indeed,  some  toxic 
chemicals  are  released  in  the  EC  vapor  as  well, 
but their levels are substantially lower compared 
with tobacco smoke, and in some cases (such as 
nitrosamines)  are  comparable  with  the  amounts 
found 
in  pharmaceutical  nicotine  products. 
Surveys,  clinical,  chemistry  and  toxicology  data 
have  often  been  mispresented  or  misinterpreted 
by  health  authorities  and  tobacco  regulators,  in 
such a way that the potential for harmful conse-
quences of EC use has been largely exaggerated 
[Polosa and Caponnetto, 2013]. It is obvious that 
some residual risk associated with EC use may be 
present, but this is probably trivial compared with 
smoking. 
the  devastating  consequences  of 
Moreover, ECs are recommended to smokers or 
former smokers only, as a substitute for conven-
tional  cigarettes  or  to  prevent  smoking  relapse; 
thus, any risk should be estimated relative to the 
risk  of  continuing  or  relapsing  back  to  smoking 
and the low efficacy of currently approved medi-
cations  for  smoking  cessation  should  be  taken 
into  consideration  [Moore  et  al.  2009;  Rigotti  

ECs are a revolutionary product in tobacco harm 
reduction.  Although  they  emit  vapor,  which 
resembles smoke, there is literally no fire (com-
bustion) and no ‘fire’ (suspicion or evidence that 
they may be the cause for disease in a similar way 
to tobacco cigarettes). Due to their unique char-
acteristics,  ECs  represent  a  historical  opportu-
nity  to  save  millions  of  lives  and  significantly 
reduce  the  burden  of  smoking-related  diseases 
worldwide.

Funding
This research received no specific grant from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-
for-profit sectors.

Conflict of interest statement
Riccardo Polosa is a Professor of Medicine and is 
supported by the University of Catania, Italy. He 
has  received  lecture  fees  and  research  funding 
from GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer, manufacturers 
of stop smoking medications. He has also served as 
a consultant for Pfizer and Arbi Group Srl (Milano, 
Italy), the distributor of Categoria™ e-Cigarettes. 
His  research  on  electronic  cigarettes  is  currently 
supported by LIAF (Lega Italiana AntiFumo).

Konstantinos Farsalinos is a researcher at Onassis 
Cardiac  Surgery  Center.  He  has  never  been 
funded  by  the  pharmaceutical  or  the  tobacco 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

81

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

industry. For some of his studies, the institution 
has  received  financial  compensation  from  elec-
tronic  cigarette  companies  for  the  studies’  cost. 
His salary is currently being paid by a scholarship 
grant from the Hellenic Society of Cardiology.

References
Adkison, S., O’Connor, R., Bansal-Travers, M., 
Hyland, A., Borland, R., Yong, H.H. et al. (2013) 
Electronic nicotine delivery systems: international 
tobacco control four-country survey. Am J Prev Med 
44: 207–215.

Ambrose, J. and Barua, R. (2004) The 
pathophysiology of cigarette smoking and 
cardiovascular disease: an update. J Am Coll Cardiol 
43: 1731–1737.

American Chemistry Council (2003) Ethylene 
Glycols: Considerations Against Use in Theatrical 
Fogs/Mist and Artificial Smoke. Available at: http://
www.americanchemistry.com/ProductsTechnology/
Ethylene-Glycols-2/PDF-Ethylene-Glycols-Fog-
Information-Sheet.pdf (Accessed: 20 November 
2013).

Antal, M., Mok, W., Roy, J. and T-Raissi, A. (1985) 
Pyrolytic sources of hydrocarbons from biomass. J 
Anal Appl Pyrol 8: 291–303.

Aubin, H., Rollema, H., Svensson, T. and Winterer, G. 
(2012) Smoking, quitting, and psychiatric disease: A 
review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 36: 271–284.

Bahl, V., Lin, S., Xu, N., Davis, B., Wang, Y. and 
Talbot, P. (2012) Comparison of electronic cigarette 
refill fluid cytotoxicity using embryonic and adult 
models. Reprod Toxicol 34: 529–537.

Barnoya, J. and Navas-Acien, A. (2013) Protecting 
the world from secondhand tobacco smoke exposure: 
where do we stand and where do we go from here? 
Nicotine Tob Res 15: 789–804.

Behar, R., Davis, B., Wang, Y., Bahl, V., Lin, S. and 
Talbot, P. (2014) Identification of toxicants in 
cinnamon-flavored electronic cigarette refill fluids. 
Toxicol In Vitro 28: 198–208.

Benowitz, N. and Gourlay, S. (1997) Cardiovascular 
toxicity of nicotine: implications for nicotine 
replacement therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 29: 1422–
1431.

Benowitz, N., Zevin, S. and Jacob, P. III (1998) 
Suppression of nicotine intake during ad libitum 
cigarette smoking by high-dose transdermal nicotine. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 287: 958–962.

Bertholon, J., Becquemin, M., Roy, M., Roy, 
F., Ledur, D., Annesi Maesano, I. et al. (2013) 

Comparison of the aerosol produced by electronic 
cigarettes with conventional cigarettes and the shisha. 
Rev Mal Respir 30: 752–757.

Brown, S., Inskip, H. and Barraclough, B. (2000) 
Causes of the excess mortality of schizophrenia. Br J 
Psychiatry 177: 212–217

Bullen, C., Howe, C., Laugesen, M., McRobbie, 
H., Parag, V., Williman, J. et al. (2013) Electronic 
cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 382: 1629–1637.

Burstyn, I. (2014) Peering through the mist: 
Systematic review of what the chemistry of 
contaminants in electronic cigarettes tells us about 
health risks. BMC Public Health 14: 18.

Cahn, Z. and Siegel, M. (2011) Electronic cigarettes 
as a harm reduction strategy for tobacco control: a 
step forward or a repeat of past mistakes? J Public 
Health Policy 32: 16–31.

Camenga, D., Delmerico, J., Kong, G., Cavallo, D., 
Hyland, A., Cummings, K. et al. (2013) Trends in  
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems by 
adolescents. Addict Behav 39(1): 338–340.

Cantrell, F. (2013) Adverse effects of e-cigarette 
exposures. J Community Health 15 December 2013 
(Epub ahead of print). DOI: 10.1007/s10900-013-
9807-5

Caponnetto, P., Auditore, R., Russo, C., Cappello, 
G. and Polosa, R. (2013a) Impact of an electronic 
cigarette on smoking reduction and cessation  
in schizophrenic smokers: a prospective 12-month 
pilot study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 10: 
446–461.

Caponnetto, P., Campagna, D., Cibella, F., Morjaria, 
J., Caruso, M., Russo, C. et al. (2013b) EffiCiency 
and Safety of an eLectronic cigAreTte (ECLAT) as 
tobacco cigarettes substitute: a prospective 12-month 
randomized control design study. PLoS One 8: 
e66317.

Caponnetto, P., Polosa, R., Auditore, R., Russo, C. 
and Campagna, D. (2011a) Smoking cessation with 
e-cigarettes in smokers with a documented history of 
depression and recurring relapses. Int J Clin Med 2: 
281–284.

Caponnetto, P., Polosa, R., Russo, C., Leotta, C. 
and Campagna, D. (2011b) Successful smoking 
cessation with electronic cigarettes in smokers with 
a documented history of recurring relapses: a case 
series. J Med Case Rep 5: 585.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
(2013) Notes from the field: electronic cigarette use 
among middle and high school students - United 
States, 2011-2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 62: 
729–730.

82 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

Chen, I. (2013) FDA summary of adverse events on 
electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res 15: 615–616.

Czekaj, P., Pałasz, A., Lebda-Wyborny, T., Nowaczyk-
Dura, G., Karczewska, W., Florek, E. et al. (2002) 
Morphological changes in lungs, placenta, liver and 
kidneys of pregnant rats exposed to cigarette smoke. 
Int Arch Occup Environ Health 75 (Suppl): S27–S35.

Czogala, J., Goniewicz, M., Fidelus, B., Zielinska-
Danch, W., Travers, M. and Sobczak, A. (2013) 
Secondhand exposure to vapors from electronic 
cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res (11 December 2011 (Epub 
ahead of print). DOI: 10.1093/ntr/ntt203

Dawkins, L. (2013) Electronic cigarettes: what are they 
and are they effective? E-Cigarette Summit, London, 
UK (oral presentation). Available at: http://e-cigarette-
summit.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Summit-
Presentations.pdf [accessed 22 December 2013].

Dawkins, L. and Corcoran, O. (2013) Acute electronic 
cigarette use: nicotine delivery and subjective effects in 
regular users. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 231: 401–407.

Dawkins, L., Turnern, J., Roberts, A. and Soar, K. (2013) 
‘Vaping’ profiles and preferences: an online survey of 
electronic cigarette users. Addiction 108: 1115–1125.

De Leon, J. and Diaz, F. (2005). A meta-analysis 
of worldwide studies demonstrates an association 
between schizophrenia and tobacco smoking 
behaviors. Schizophr Res 76: 1351–1357.

Dockrell, M., Morison, R., Bauld, L. and McNeill, A. 
(2013) E-Cigarettes: prevalence and attitudes in Great 
Britain. Nicotine Tob Res 15: 1737–1744.

Douptcheva, N., Gmel, G., Studer, J., Deline, S. and 
Etter, J.F. (2013) Use of electronic cigarettes among 
young Swiss men. J Epidemiol Community Health 67: 
1075–1076.

Environmental Protection Agency (1992) EPA 
Report/600/6-90/006F. Respiratory health effects of 
passive smoking: lung cancer and other disorders. 
Washington, DC. Available at: http://oaspub.epa.
gov/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=36793 
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).

Environmental Protection Agency (2000) 
Cinnamaldehyde (040506) fact sheet. Available 
at: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/
reg_actions/registration/fs_PC-040506_1-Oct-98.pdf 
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).

Etter, J. and Bullen, C. (2011) Electronic cigarette: 
users profile, utilization, satisfaction and perceived 
efficacy. Addiction 106: 2017–2028.

Etter, J., Zäther, E. and Svensson, S. (2013) Analysis 
of refill liquids for electronic cigarettes. Addiction 108: 
1671–1679.

smoking cessation with the use of electronic  
cigarette: a case report. Clin Med Insights Case Rep 6: 
15–21.

Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G., Allifranchini, E., 
Ripamonti, E., Bocchietto, E., Todeschi, S. et al.
(2013a) Comparison of the cytotoxic potential of 
cigarette smoke and electronic cigarette vapour extract 
on cultured myocardial cells. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 10: 5146–5162.

Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G., Tsiapras, D., 
Kyrzopoulos, S. and Voudris, V. (2013b) Evaluating 
nicotine levels selection and patterns of electronic 
cigarette use in a group of “vapers” who had achieved 
complete substitution of smoking. Subst Abuse 7:  
139–146.

Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G., Tsiapras, D., 
Kyrzopoulos, S. and Voudris, V. (2013c) Evaluation 
of electronic cigarette use (vaping) topography and 
estimation of liquid consumption: implications for 
research protocol standards definition and for public 
health authorities’ regulation. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 10: 2500–2514.

Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G. and Voudris, V. (2013d) 
Authors miss the opportunity to discuss important 
public health implications. J Chromatogr A 1312: 
155–156.

Farsalinos, K., Spyrou, A., Tsimopoulou, K., 
Stefopoulos, C., Romagna, G. and Voudris, V. 
(2014). Nicotine absorption from electronic cigarette 
use: comparison between first and new-generation 
devices. Sci Rep (in press).

Farsalinos, K., Tsiapras, D., Kyrzopoulos, S., 
Savvopoulou, M., Avramidou, E., Vasilopoulou, D. 
et al. (2012) Acute effects of using an electronic 
nicotine-delivery device (e-cigarette) on myocardial 
function: comparison with the effects of regular 
cigarettes. Eur Heart J 33(Abstract Supplement): 203.

Farsalinos, K., Tsiapras, D., Kyrzopoulos, S., 
Stefopoulos, C., Spyrou, A., Tsakalou, M. et al. 
(2013f) Immediate effects of electronic cigarette use 
on coronary circulation and blood carboxyhemoglobin 
levels: comparison with cigarette smoking. Eur Heart J 
34(Abstract Supplement): 13.

Flouris, A., Chorti, M., Poulianiti, K., Jamurtas, 
A., Kostikas, K., Tzatzarakis, M. et al. (2013) Acute 
impact of active and passive electronic cigarette 
smoking on serum cotinine and lung function. Inhal 
Toxicol 25: 91–101.

Flouris, A., Poulianiti, K., Chorti, M., Jamurtas, A., 
Kouretas, D., Owolabi, E. et al. (2012) Acute effects of 
electronic and tobacco cigarette smoking on complete 
blood count. Food Chem Toxicol 50: 3600–3603.

Farsalinos, K. and Romagna, G. (2013) Chronic 
idiopathic neutrophilia in a smoker, relieved after 

Food and Drug Administration (2009) FDA and 
Public health experts warn about electronic cigarettes. 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

83

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

Available at: http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/
Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm173222.htm 
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).

Gennimata, S., Palamidas, A., Kaltsakas, G., Tsikrika, 
S., Vakali, S., Gratziou, C. et al. (2012) Acute effect of 
e-cigarette on pulmonary function in healthy subjects 
and smokers. Presented at the European Respiratory 
Society’s Annual Congress, Poster P1053. Available 
at: https://www.ersnetsecure.org/public/prg_congres.
abstract?ww_i_presentation=59718 (Accessed: 20 
November 2013).

Goniewicz, M., Knysak, J., Gawron, M., Kosmider, 
L., Sobczak, A., Kurek, J. et al. (2013) Levels of 
selected carcinogens and toxicants in vapour from 
electronic cigarettes. Tob Control. DOI: 10.1136/
tobaccocontrol-2012-050859. (Published online: 6 
March 2013).

Greenland, S., Satterfield, M. and Lanes, S. (1998) A 
meta-analysis to assess the incidence of adverse effects 
associated with the transdermal nicotine patch. Drug 
Safety 18: 297–308.

Guillem, K., Vouillac, C., Azar, M., Parsons, L., Koob, 
G., Cador, M. et al. (2005) Monoamine oxidase 
inhibition dramatically increases the motivation to 
self-administer nicotine in rats. J Neurosci 25:  
8593–8600.

Guslandi, M. (1999) Nicotine treatment for ulcerative 
colitis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 48: 481–484.

Hadwiger, M., Trehy, M., Ye, W., Moore, T., Allgire, 
J. and Westenberger, B. (2010) Identification of 
amino-tadalafil and rimonabant in electronic 
cigarette products using high pressure liquid 
chromatography with diode array and tandem mass 
spectrometric detection. J Chromatogr A 1217: 
7547–7555.

Hajek, P., Jarvis, M., Belcher, M., Sutherland, G. and 
Feyerabend, C. (1989) Effect of smoke-free cigarettes 
on 24 h cigarette withdrawal: a double-blind placebo-
controlled study. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 97: 
99–102.

Hubbard, R., Lewis, S., Smith, C., Godfrey, C., 
Smeeth, L., Farrington, P. et al. (2005) Use of 
nicotine replacement therapy and the risk of acute 
myocardial infarction, stroke, and death. Tob Control 
14: 416–421.

Kim, H. and Shin, H. (2013) Determination of 
tobacco-specific nitrosamines in replacement liquids 
of electronic cigarettes by liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 1291: 
48–55.

King, B., Alam, S., Promoff, G., Arrazola, R. and 
Dube, S. (2013) Awareness and ever use of electronic 
cigarettes among US adults, 2010–2011. Nicotine Tob 
Res 15(9): 1623–1627.

Laugesen, M. (2008) Safety Report on the 
Ruyan® e-cigarette Cartridge and Inhaled 
Aerosol. Available at: http://www.healthnz.co.nz/
RuyanCartridgeReport30-Oct-08.pdf (Accessed: 18 
November 2013).

Laugesen, M. (2009). Ruyan®E-cigarette Bench-top 
tests. Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 
(SRNT) Dublin, Poster 5-11. Available at: http://
www.healthnz.co.nz/DublinEcigBenchtopHandout.
pdf [accessed 20 November 2013].

Le Houezec, J., McNeill, A. and Britton, J. (2011) 
Tobacco, nicotine and harm reduction. Drug Alcohol 
Rev 30: 119–123.

Lee, S., Grana, R. and Glantz, S. (2013) Electronic 
cigarette use among Korean adolescents: a cross-
sectional study of market penetration, dual use, 
and relationship to quit attempts and former 
smoking. J Adolesc Health. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2013.11.003. (Published online: 22 
November 2013).

Lotfipour, S., Arnold, M., Hogenkamp, D., Gee, K., 
Belluzzi, J. and Leslie, F. (2011) The monoamine 
oxidase (MAO) inhibitor tranylcypromine enhances 
nicotine self-administration in rats through a 
mechanism independent of MAO inhibition. 
Neuropharmacology 61: 95–104.

Lúdvíksdóttir, D., Blöndal, T., Franzon, M., 
Gudmundsson, T. and Säwe, U. (1999) Effects of nicotine 
nasal spray on atherogenic and thrombogenic factors 
during smoking cessation. J Intern Med 246: 61–66.

Mayer, B. (2013). How much nicotine kills a human? 
Tracing back the generally accepted lethal dose to 
dubious self-experiments in the nineteenth century. 
Arch Toxicol 88: 5–7.

Mayers, M. (2009) FDA acts to protect public 
health from electronic cigarettes. Campaign for 
Tobacco-Free Kids statement. Available at: http://
www.tobaccofreekids.org/press_releases/post/id_1166 
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).

McAuley, T., Hopke, P., Zhao, J. and Babaian, S. 
(2012) Comparison of the effects of e-cigarette vapor 
and cigarette smoke on indoor air quality. Inhal Toxicol 
24: 850–857.

McCauley, L., Markin, C. and Hosmer, D. (2012) An 
unexpected consequence of electronic cigarette use. 
Chest 141(4): 1110–1113.

McClernon, F., Hiott, F., Westman, E., Rose, J. and 
Levin, E. (2006) Transdermal nicotine attenuates 
depression symptoms in nonsmokers: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
189: 125–133.

MHRA Commission on human medicines, Working 
Group on nicotine containing products (NCPS) 
(2013). Current use of electronic cigarettes. Available 

84 

http://taw.sagepub.com

KE Farsalinos and R Polosa

at: http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/comms-ic/
documents/websiteresources/con286845.pdf 
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).

Moore, D., Aveyard, P., Connock, M., Wang, D., 
Fry-Smith, A. and Barton, P. (2009) Effectiveness and 
safety of nicotine replacement therapy  
assisted reduction to stop smoking: systematic  
review and meta-analysis. BMJ 338: b1024. 

on smoking reduction and cessation: a prospective 
6-month pilot study. BMC Public Health 11: 786.

Polosa, R., Morjaria, J., Caponnetto, P., Campagna, 
D., Russo, C., Alamo, A. et al. (2013a) Effectiveness 
and tolerability of electronic cigarette in real-life: a 
24-month prospective observational study. Intern 
Emerg Med. DOI: 10.1007/s11739-013-0977-z 
(Published online: July 2013). 

Murray, R., Bailey, W., Daniels, K., Bjornson, W., 
Kurnow, K., Connett, J. et al. (1996) Safety of 
nicotine polacrilex gum used by 3,094 participants in 
the Lung Health Study. Lung Health Study Research 
Group. Chest 109: 438–445.

National Association of Attorneys General (2013) 
FDA regulation on E-cigarettes. Available at: http://
www.naag.org/assets/files/pdf/E%20Cigarette%20
Final%20Letter%20(5)(1).pdf (Accessed: 20 
November 2013).

Nides, M., Leischow, S., Bhatter, M. and Simmons, 
M. (2014) Nicotine blood levels and short-term 
smoking reduction with an electronic nicotine delivery 
system. Am J Health Behav 38: 265–274.

Nielsen, S., Franklin, G., Longstreth, W., Swanson, 
P. and Checkoway, H. (2013) Nicotine from edible 
Solanaceae and risk of Parkinson disease. Ann Neurol 
74: 472–477.

Nitenberg, A. and Antony, I. (1999) Effects of nicotine 
gum on coronary vasomotor responses  
during sympathetic stimulation in patients with 
coronary artery stenosis. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 34: 
694–699.

Palamidas, A., Gennimata, S., Kaltsakas, G., Tsikrika, 
S., Vakali, S., Gratziou, C. et al. (2013) Acute effect 
of an e-cigarette with and without nicotine on lung 
function. Presented at the European Respiratory 
Society’s Annual Congress, Poster P1054. Available 
at: http://www.ersnet.org/learning_resources_player/
abstract_print_13/files/100.pdf (Accessed: 20 
November 2013).

Pellegrino, R., Tinghino, B., Mangiaracina, G., 
Marani, A., Vitali, M., Protano, C. et al. (2012) 
Electronic cigarettes: an evaluation of exposure to 
chemicals and fine particulate matter (PM). Ann Ig 
24: 279–288.

Peters, A. (2005) Particulate matter and heart disease: 
evidence from epidemiological studies. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 207: 477–482.

Polosa, R. and Caponnetto, P. (2013) Time for 
evidence-based e-cigarette regulation. Lancet Oncol 14: 
582–583.

Polosa, R., Caponnetto, P., Morjaria, J., Papale, 
G., Campagna, D. and Russo, C. (2011) Effect of 
an electronic nicotine delivery device (e-Cigarette) 

Polosa, R., Rodu, B., Caponnetto, P., Maglia, M. 
and Raciti, C. (2013b) A fresh look at tobacco harm 
reduction: the case for the electronic cigarette. Harm 
Reduct J 10: 19.

Pryor, W. and Stone, K. (1993) Oxidants in cigarette 
smoke: radicals, hydrogen peroxide, peroxynitrate, and 
peroxynitrite. Ann NY Acad Sci 686: 12–28.

Ravindra, K., Wauters, E. and Van Grieken, R. (2008) 
Variation in particulate PAHs levels and their relation 
with the transboundary movement of the air masses. 
Sci Total Environ 396: 100–110.

Renne, R., Wehner, A., Greenspan, B., Deford, H., 
Ragan, H., Westenberg, R. et al. (1992) 2-Week and 
13-Week Inhalation Studies of Aerosolized Glycerol in 
Rats. Inhal Toxicol 4: 95–111.

Riess, U., Tegtbur, U., Fauck, C., Fuhrmann, 
F., Markewitz, D. and Salthammer, T. (2010) 
Experimental setup and analytical methods for 
the non-invasive determination of volatile organic 
compounds, formaldehyde and NOx in exhaled 
human breath. Anal Chim Acta 669: 53–62.

Rigotti, N., Pipe, A., Benowitz, N., Arteaga, C., 
Garza, D. and Tonstad, S. (2010) Efficacy and safety 
of varenicline for smoking cessation in patients with 
cardiovascular disease: A randomized trial. Circulation 
121: 221–229. 

Robertson, O., Loosli, C., Puck, T., Wise, H., Lemon, 
H. and Lester, W. Jr (1947) Tests for the chronic 
toxicity of propylene glycol and triethylene glycol 
on monkeys and rats by vapor inhalation and oral 
administration. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 91: 52–76.

Rodu, B. and Godshall, W. (2006) Tobacco harm 
reduction: An alternative cessation strategy for 
inveterate smokers. Harm Reduct J 3: 37.

Romagna, G., Allifranchini, E., Bocchietto, E., 
Todeschi, S., Esposito, M. and Farsalinos, K. (2013) 
Cytotoxicity evaluation of electronic cigarette 
vapor extract on cultured mammalian fibroblasts 
(ClearStream-LIFE): comparison with tobacco 
cigarette smoke extract. Inhal Toxicol 25: 354–361.

Romagna, G., Zabarini, L., Barbiero, L., 
Bocchietto, E., Todeschi, S., Caravati, E. et al. 
(2012) Characterization of chemicals released 
to the environment by electronic cigarettes use 
(ClearStream-Air project): is passive vaping a reality? 

http://taw.sagepub.com 

85

Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)

SRNT Europe Annual Congress, Helsinki, Finland. 
Poster RRP18. Available at: http://www.srnteurope.
org/assets/srnt-e2012abstractbook.pdf [accessed 20 
November 2013].

Carboxyhaemoglobin levels, health and lifestyle 
perceptions in smokers converting from tobacco 
cigarettes to electronic cigarettes. S Afr Med J 103: 
865–868.

Rose, J. (2006) Nicotine and nonnicotine factors in 
cigarette addiction. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 184: 
274–285.

Rose, J. and Levin, E. (1991) Inter-relationships 
between conditioned and primary reinforcement in 
the maintenance of cigarette smoking. Br J Addict 86: 
605–609.

Russell, M. (1991) The future of nicotine replacement. 
Br J Addict 86: 653–658.

Vardavas, C., Anagnostopoulos, N., Kougias, M., 
Evangelopoulou, V., Connolly, G. and Behrakis, 
P. (2012) Short-term pulmonary effects of using 
an electronic cigarette: impact on respiratory flow 
resistance, impedance, and exhaled nitric oxide. Chest 
141: 1400–1406.

Varughese, S., Teschke, K., Brauer, M., Chow, Y., 
van Netten, C. and Kennedy, S. (2005) Effects of 
theatrical smokes and fogs on respiratory health in the 
entertainment industry. Am J Ind Med 47: 411–418.

Sahakian, B., Jones, G., Levy, R., Gray, J. and 
Warburton, D.(1989) The effects of nicotine on 
attention, information processing, and short-term 
memory in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer 
type. Br J Psychiatry 154: 797–800.

Saitta, D., Ferro, G. and Polosa, R. (2014) Achieving 
appropriate regulations for electronic cigarettes. Ther 
Adv Chronic Dis 3 February 2014 (Epub ahead of 
print). DOI: 10.1177/2040622314521271

Schiller, J. and Ni, H. (2006) Cigarette smoking 
and smoking cessation among persons with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Health Promot 
20: 319–323.

Schober, W., Szendrei, K., Matzen, W., Osiander-
Fuchs, H., Heitmann, D., Schettgen, T. et al. (2013) 
Use of electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) impairs 
indoor air quality and increases FeNO levels of 
e-cigarette consumers. Int J Hyg Environ Health. DOI: 
10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.11.003. (Published online: 6 
December 2013).

Schripp, T., Markewitz, D., Uhde, E. and Salthammer, 
T. (2013) Does e-cigarette consumption cause passive 
vaping? Indoor Air 23: 25–31.

Seaton, A., MacNee, W., Donaldson, K. and Godden, 
D. (1995) Particulate air pollution and acute health 
effects. Lancet 345: 176-178.

Stein, Y., Antal, M. and Jones, M. (1983) A study of 
the gas-phase pyrolysis of glycerol. J Anal Appl Pyrol 4: 
283–296.

US Fire Administration (2012) Smoking-related Fires 
in residential buildings (2008-2010). Topical Fire 
Report Series 13. Available at: http://www.usfa.fema.
gov/downloads/pdf/statistics/v13i6.pdf (Accessed: 20 
November 2013).

US Pharmacopeia (2013) Elemental impurities limits. 
Available at: http://www.usp.org/sites/default/files/usp_
pdf/EN/USPNF/key-issues/c232_final.pdf (Accessed: 
20 November 2013).

Van Staden, S., Groenewald, M., Engelbrecht, 
R., Becker, P. and Hazelhurst, L. (2013) 

Werley, M., McDonald, P., Lilly, P., Kirkpatrick, D., 
Wallery, J., Byron, P. et al. (2011) Non-clinical safety 
and pharmacokinetic evaluations of propylene glycol 
aerosol in Sprague-Dawley rats and Beagle dogs. 
Toxicology 287: 76–90.

Westenberger, B. (2009) Evaluation of e-Cigarettes. 
St.Louis, MO: Department of Health and Human 
Services, Food and Drug Administration, Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research, Division of 
Pharmaceutical Analysis. Available at: http://www.fda.
gov/downloads/drugs/Scienceresearch/UCM173250.
pdf (Accessed: November 10, 2013).

WHO-IARC (2004) IARC monographs on the 
evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Volume 
83, tobacco smoke and involuntary smoking. Available 
at: http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol83/
mono83.pdf. (Accessed: 20 November 2013).

Wieslander, G., Norbäck, D. and Lindgren, T. (2001) 
Experimental exposure to propylene glycol mist 
in aviation emergency training: acute ocular and 
respiratory effects. Occup Environ Med 58: 649–655.

Williams, M., Villarreal, A., Bozhilov, K., Lin, S. and 
Talbot, P. (2013) Metal and silicate particles including 
nanoparticles are present in electronic cigarette 
cartomizer fluid and aerosol. PLoS One 8: e57987.

World Health Organization (2013) Tobacco fact sheet 
No 339. Updated July 2013. Available at: http://www.
who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs339/en/ (Accessed: 
18 November 2013).

Woolf, K., Zabad, M., Post, J., McNitt, S., Williams, 
G. and Bisognano, J. (2012) Effect of nicotine 
replacement therapy on cardiovascular outcomes after 
acute coronary syndromes. Am J Cardiol 110: 968–970.

Yudkin, P., Hey, K., Roberts, S., Welch, S., Murphy, 
M. and Walton, R. (2003) Abstinence from smoking 
eight years after participation in randomised 
controlled trial of nicotine patch. BMJ 327: 28–29. 

Zevin, S., Benowitz, N. and Jacob, P. (1998) Dose-
related cardiovascular and endocrine effects of 
transdermal nicotine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 64: 87–95.

http://taw.sagepub.com

Visit SAGE journals online 
http://taw.sagepub.com

SAGE journals

86 

