60

THIEME

E-Cigarettes and Cardiovascular Risk: Beyond
Science and Mysticism

Giuseppe Lippi, MD1
Camilla Mattiuzzi, MD4

Emmanuel J. Favaloro, PhD, FFSc (RCPA)2 Tiziana Meschi, MD3

Loris Borghi, MD3 Gianfranco Cervellin, MD5

1 Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, Academic Hospital

of Parma, Parma, Italy

2 Department of Haematology, Institute of Clinical Pathology and

Address for correspondence Giuseppe Lippi, MD, U.O. Diagnostica
Ematochimica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Via
Gramsci, 14, 43126-Parma, Italy (e-mail: glippi@ao.pr.it; ulippi@tin.it).

Medical Research (ICPMR), Westmead Hospital,
New South Wales, Australia

3 Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy
4 Service of Clinical Governance, General Hospital of Trento,

Trento, Italy

5 Emergency Department, Academic Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy

Semin Thromb Hemost 2014;40:60–65.

Abstract

Keywords
► e-cigarette
► electronic cigarette
► cardiovascular disease
► risk factor
► tobacco

Cigarette smoking is the most important cause of premature death, and it is currently
listed as a major independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Because of
restrictive measures and widespread control policies, tobacco companies are now
using aggressive marketing strategies in favor of smokeless tobacco, including elec-
tronic nicotine delivery systems, which are also known as electronic cigarettes or e-
cigarettes. Although the regular use of these devices appears less hazardous than
traditional cigarettes or other forms of smokeless tobacco, recent studies have shown
that various potentially harmful substances, especially nicotine, ultraparticles, and
volatile organic compounds, may be effectively inhaled or liberated in exhaled air during
repeated e-cigarette pufﬁng. This would enhance the risk of cardiac arrhythmias and
hypertension, which may predispose some users to increased risk of cardiovascular
events, which may be further magniﬁed by other potential adverse effects such as
arrhythmias, increased respiratory, and ﬂow respiratory resistance. Some cases of
intoxication have also been described, wherein large amounts of nicotine and other
harmful compounds may be effectively absorbed. As the use of e-cigarettes is
continuously rising, and it is also considered a potentially effective method for smoking
cessation, more focused research is urgently needed to deﬁnitely establish the
cardiovascular safeness of these devices.

The Cigarette Smoke Epidemics

According to the latest available updates released by the
American Heart Association (AHA), 21.3% of men and 16.7%
of women aged 18 years or older are current cigarette
smokers in the United States. Although the percentage of
current cigarette smokers (i.e., 19.0% overall) has declined by
nearly one-ﬁfth since 1998, when the rate was 24.1%,1

tobacco smoking causes nearly 19.1% of overall deaths in
the United States, with approximately one-third of these
attributable to cardiovascular disease. Even more impressive
is that approximately 11% of cigarette smoking–related
deaths are reportedly caused by second-hand (so called
passive) smoke. The direct medical costs and lost productivity
costs associated with smoking are estimated at approximate-
ly $96 and $97 billion, thus totaling an estimated $193 billion

Issue Theme Hot Topics V;
Guest Editor, Emmanuel
J. Favaloro, PhD, FFSc (RCPA).
published online
December 16, 2013

DOI http://dx.doi.org/
10.1055/s-0033-1363468.
ISSN 0094-6176.

Copyright © 2016 by Thieme Medical
Publishers, Inc., 333 Seventh Avenue,
New York, NY 10001, USA.
Tel: +1(212) 584-4662.

per year.1 Cigarette smoking, either in active or passive form,
is therefore considered the most important preventable cause
of premature death in the United States as well as in most
industrialized and developing countries and is currently
listed as a “major” independent risk factor for cardiovascular
disease.2 Cigarette smoke contains thousands of chemicals
such as nicotine, carbon monoxide (CO), tar, and several
carcinogens among many others, which contribute to a
kaleidoscope of negative effects on human biology, including
hypertension, decreased exercise tolerance, progression of
atherosclerotic lesions, and procoagulant effects.

Smokeless Tobacco

Smokeless tobacco is a vague term that refers to several
tobacco products used by means other than smoking and
includes snuff (loose tobacco particles or sachets), chewing
(loose leaf, plug, and twist formulations), spit tobacco, oral
compresses, and dry powders (e.g., moist, nass, snus, gutkha,
or gul tobacco). These products usually contain several addi-
tives, some of which are added for ﬂavor (e.g., nuts, vanilla,
sugar, spices, and oils), and others to enhance pH (e.g.,
ammonium and sodium carbonate) and thus increase the
concentration of unprotonated nicotine.3 The nicotine and
other compounds contained in formulations are typically
absorbed across the buccal mucosa, whereas dry ﬁne powder
formulations of snuff can also be sniffed into the nose.
Because of the different manufacturing techniques, products
may vary broadly in chemical composition and relative nico-
tine content (e.g., approximately 10 mg/g of product in
chewing tobacco, approximately 17 mg/g of product in dry
snuff tobacco, approximately 13 mg/g of product in moist
snuff tobacco, as compared with 7 to 13 mg/g of product in
traditional cigarettes).3 Although the absorption of combus-
tion-derived carcinogenic substances such as benzo[a]pyrene
and other polycyclic compounds is expectedly lower, other
carcinogens such as nitrosamines have instead a relatively
high concentration in smokeless tobacco products.3

The Electronic Cigarette

Because of the restrictive measures and widespread control
policies, particularly in developed countries, tobacco compa-
nies are now using aggressive marketing policies in favor of
smokeless tobacco for recovery from economical loss due to
reduced income from traditional cigarette smoke. Along with
more traditional and prevalent forms of smokeless tobacco,
electronic nicotine delivery systems—also known as “elec-
tronic cigarettes” or “e-cigarettes”—were ﬁrst commercial-
ized in China nearly 10 years ago, and their market rapidly
grew and spread, ﬁrst through sales via the Web, and more
recently, in tobacco shops and retail outlets. Basically, an e-
cigarette is a device that looks and should feel like a real
cigarette, but which does not burn tobacco. Within a tube
containing a mouthpiece and a socket for cartridge insertion,
a conventional e-cigarette also houses a battery, a heating
element, a power source, and a pressure switch. The cartridge,
which is device speciﬁc, typically contains 0 to 20 mg of

E-Cigarettes and Cardiovascular Risk

Lippi et al.

61

nicotine (►Fig. 1). The reﬁll kit, which may contain up to 1 g
of nicotine in a small bottle, is used to ﬁll the cartridge with
replacement solution at higher doses than originally con-
tained.4 With notable differences among different brands and
types, these devices also contain various amounts of humec-
tants such as propylene glycol or glycerol to produce the
vapor, ﬂavors (e.g., mint, vanilla, fruit, and chocolate),5 and
even drugs such as rimonabant (i.e., a substance typically used
for weight loss) and amino tadalaﬁl (i.e., a drug analog of the
commercially approved tadalaﬁl, which is used to treat
erectile dysfunction).6

With regard to the concordance between the content of
e-cigarette reﬁll bottles and what is stated on the label, Etter
et al purchased and assessed 20 bottles of 10 different brands (19
were obtained from Web sites and shipped by regular mail by
retailers and the remainder was obtained directly from the
manufacturer).7 The analysis, based on ultrahigh performance
liquid chromatography and gas chromatography, was aimed to
quantify nicotine content, known nicotine degradation products
and potential impurities. The relative nicotine content of each
bottle was rather similar to that claimed by the manufacturer
and reported in the label, with a mean percentage concordance
of 99.8% (95% conﬁdence interval [CI], 97.6–101.9%) and a range
between 85 and 121%. The remarkable concentration of nico-
tine-related impurities found in the bottles (between 0 and 4.4%
of nicotine concentration, although most samples exhibited
values between 1 and 2% of nicotine content) suggests, however,
that oxidative degradation of the basic compound may have
occurred during manufacturing of ingredients or ﬁnal liquid, or
that nondesirable interactions with the packaging material may
have occurred along with inadequate handling and storage of
bottles. Neither ethylene glycol nor diethylene glycol could be
detected in ﬂuids, which suggests that the overall quality of e-
liquids may be somehow reassuring. Cameron et al analyzed
nicotine solutions contained in seven different e-cigarettes by
liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass
spectrometry8 and found that the concentration of nicotine
was equivalent to—or lower than—that marked or expected,
given the manufacturer concentration ranges provided (i.e.,

Fig. 1 Composition of a conventional electronic cigarette
(e-cigarette).

Seminars in Thrombosis & Hemostasis

Vol. 40 No. 1/2014

62

E-Cigarettes and Cardiovascular Risk

Lippi et al.

between 41 and 93%). Nevertheless, the absolute level (i.e., from
8.5 to 22.2 mg/mL) was sufﬁcient to be toxic or lethal should
the product be orally ingested or transdermally absorbed and
considering that the fatal dose of nicotine is 30 to 60 mg in
adults and 10 mg in children.5 In another recent study, Kim
and Shin used liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectro-
metric to detect and measure tobacco-speciﬁc nitrosamines—
which are well-established carcinogenic substances—in 105
replacement liquids of e-cigarettes produced by 11 compa-
nies.9 The overall rate of detection of one or more of these
harmful compounds was 93% (varying between 54 and 87%
according to the different speciﬁc substance), with a maximum
concentration of 86.92 µg/L, which was up to 10 times higher
than that declared by manufacturers. In line with this ﬁnding,
Williams et al found signiﬁcant amounts of metal and silicate
particles in cartomizer aerosol, which further supports the
need for improved quality control in e-cigarette design and
manufacture.10

The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of e-cigarettes
have been investigated in some studies. Bullen et al earlier
reported that the use of a 16-mg electronic nicotine delivery
device increased serum nicotine to a peak of 1.3 ng/mL within
19.6 minutes as compared with 13.4 ng/mL in 14.3 minutes
using a traditional tobacco cigarette.11 Vansickel et al also
assessed plasma nicotine and carbon CO concentration in 32
subjects who took 10 puffs of 16 mg or 18 mg electronic nicotine
delivery devices compared with a traditional tobacco cigarette.12
The mean plasma nicotine increased from a preadministration
level of 2.1 ng/mL to a peak of 18.8 ng/mL 5 minutes after the use
of traditional cigarette, whereas no signiﬁcant changes could be
observed for either e-cigarette device. Similarly, the mean CO
increased from a preadministration level of 5.3 parts per million
(ppm) to a peak of 16.2 ppm 15 minutes after use of traditional
cigarette, but again, no signiﬁcant changes could be found for
both e-cigarettes. Passive vaping (vaporizing) has also been
reported from consumption of e-cigarettes. Schripp et al ana-
lyzed the release of volatile organic compounds and (ultra)ﬁne
particles from an e-cigarette under near-to-real-use condi-
tions,13 and found a high amount of 1,2-propanediol along
with moderate levels of 1,2,3-propanetriol, diacetin, nicotine,
and ultraﬁne particles in exhaled air. Ingebrethsen et al also
found that undiluted e-cigarette aerosols have particle diameters
averaging between 250 and 450 nm, with approximate concen-
tration of 109 particles/cm3 range, which are ﬁgures globally
comparable to those found in tobacco burning cigarette smoke.14
Finally, Goniewicz et al recently assessed nicotine levels in vapor
generated from 16 e-cigarettes differing for brands and mod-
els.15 The mean nicotine amount in original unused cartridges
was 10.3 mg (95% CI, 7.2–13.4 mg), that contained in reﬁll
solutions was 15.3 mg (95% CI, 11.6–18.9 mg), and that released
to vapor with 150 puffs was 4.0 mg (95% CI, 2.6–5.4 mg). Overall,
the effective vaporization of nicotine ranged from 21 to 85% of
the relative amounts present in cartridges. By assuming that 15
puffs of e-cigarette may be more or less equivalent to smoking
one tobacco cigarette, the overall amount of nicotine inhaled
with an electronic cigarette would hence range between 0.025
and 0.77 mg. This is a lower amount than that absorbed by
smoking a traditional tobacco cigarette (i.e., between 1.54 and

Seminars in Thrombosis & Hemostasis

Vol. 40 No. 1/2014

2.60 mg), but still represents a meaningful quantity that can be
notably increased by enhancing puff strength or using higher
amounts of reﬁll(s). Taken together, these data provide clear
evidence that a variety of harmful substances—especially
nicotine, ultraparticles, and volatile organic compounds—may
be effectively inhaled or liberated in the exhaled air during
repeated e-cigarette pufﬁng (►Fig. 2).

E-Cigarette and Cardiovascular Disease

The use of these devices for management of tobacco depen-
dence is controversial due to a paucity of long-term safety
results and randomized, controlled data. The typical proﬁle of
an e-cigarette user has been investigated by Dawkins et al in
an online survey.16 The vast majority of participants, up to
74%, reported not smoking for at least a few weeks as using
the e-cigarette, whereas 70% of them reported a reduced urge
to smoke. Approximately 72% of the participants were using a
“tank” system, most commonly the eGo-C (Shenzhen
Joyetech Co. Ltd., ShenZhen, China). The mean period of use
was 10 months. A very low number of participants (i.e., 1%)
reported exclusive use of nonnicotine-containing liquid.
Indeed, the awareness and current use of these devices
steadily grows. In Great Britain, for example, the current
use of e-cigarettes among the overall general population
has more than doubled between 2010 and 2012 (i.e., from
2.7 to 6.7%).17

Although it is usually considered less harmful than ciga-
rette smoking for both cancer and cardiovascular disease,
there is increasing evidence supporting the notion that
smokeless tobacco may be less safe than conventionally
supposed. The largest epidemiological study regarding the
potential inﬂuence of smokeless tobacco on cardiovascular
risk was published in 2010. In this large prospective trial, the
incidence of cardiovascular disease was assessed in 14,498
participants of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
(ARIC) Study, aged 45 to 64 years at baseline.18 Smokeless
tobacco use was herein deﬁned as “current and past use of
chewing tobacco and snuff.” During a median follow-up of
16.7 years, 2,572 cardiovascular events (i.e., acute coronary
syndrome or stroke) were recorded. The current use of
smokeless tobacco at baseline conferred a 1.27-fold (95% CI,
1.06–1.52) greater risk of cardiovascular events than the
nonuse, even after adjustment for several demographic,
socioeconomic, lifestyle, and tobacco-related variables. Even

Fig. 2 Potentially toxic substances generated by electronic cigarettes.

E-Cigarettes and Cardiovascular Risk

Lippi et al.

63

more interestingly, although the risk of cardiovascular events
was higher in smokers of traditional cigarettes (i.e., 1.46; 95%
CI, 1.29–1.66), the cardiovascular rate associated with current
use of smokeless tobacco was more than 30% higher than that
for current cigarette smoking (i.e., 21/1,000 vs. 16/1,000 per-
son-years), and this has been attributed to an acute response to
the over 2,000 various chemical compounds contained in
smokeless tobacco. In the earlier meta-analysis of Boffetta
and Straif the relative risk for ever use of smokeless tobacco
products was 1.13 (95% CI, 1.06–1.21) for myocardial infarction
and 1.40 (95% CI, 1.28–1.54) for stroke, respectively.19 A recent
Policy Statement by the AHA concluded that data from the
majority of available studies do not support an increased
incidence of hypertension or nonfatal and fatal myocardial
infarction in users of smokeless tobacco,3 although data
published by Yatsuya and Folsom18 and the outcome of the
meta-analysis by Boffetta and Straif19 raise serious doubts
about this conclusion.

So, although available data show that smokeless tobacco
may carry a tangible cardiovascular risk for current users, these
ﬁndings cannot be automatically translated to e-cigarettes,
because of their peculiar manufacturing and composition.
Unfortunately, the relatively recent commercialization has
not permitted performance of large prospective studies and
attainment of any reliable estimate of the potential cardiovas-
cular risk of these devices. Nevertheless, some preliminary
publications and case reports should raise widespread alert-
ness regarding the cardiovascular safety of these devices.

Vardavas et al investigated whether the use of an electronic
cigarette for 5 minutes would produce a signiﬁcant effect on
pulmonary function and fraction of exhaled nitric oxide in 30
healthy adult smokers20 and reported an immediate decrease
in fraction of exhaled nitric oxide along with enhanced total
respiratory and ﬂow respiratory resistances. These ﬁndings led
the authors to conclude that the negative biological effects of
short-term use of e-cigarettes may be similar to those observed
with conventional tobacco smoking. Comparable ﬁndings
were reported by Gennimata et al who assessed spirometry,
static lung volumes, airway resistance, airway conductance,
and a single breath nitrogen test in 32 consecutive subjects, 8
of whom never smoked, and 24 of whom were instead smokers
(11 with normal spirometry and 13 with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and asthma) immediately after smoking an
e-cigarette for 10 minutes.21 A statistically signiﬁcant increase
was observed in airway resistance combined with a signiﬁcant
decrease of airway conductance (especially in smokers and
nonsmokers) but not in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and asthma. These results led the authors
to conclude that the sudden increase in airway resistance may
cause immediate harm after using the device, especially in
selected categories of patients, such as those suffering from
coronary artery disease. In a further study, Farsalinos et al
assessed cardiac function in 20 healthy young daily smokers
aged 25 to 45 years, before and after smoking 1 tobacco
cigarette and 22 daily electronic cigarette users of similar
age before and after using an e-cigarette with nicotine concen-
tration of 11 mg/mL for 7 minutes.22 The use of the e-cigarette
did not cause signiﬁcant alterations in any echocardiographic

parameters, except for a modest increase of MV-A wave,
whereas smokers of a tobacco cigarette exhibited a variety of
signiﬁcant abnormalities. This led the authors to conclude that
an e-cigarette does not trigger acute adverse effects on cardiac
function.

Although the e-cigarette may therefore be safer than
traditional tobacco smoke and even other types of smokeless
tobacco when used under ideal conditions, adverse effects
together with occasional cases of poisoning by device reﬁlls
have been described.
In an interesting study, Hua et al
collected short-term health effects produced by e-cigarette
use through an analysis of original posts from three online
e-cigarettes forums.23 Overall, 387 different effects were
identiﬁed, 318 of which (82%) were negative (the remaining
were characterized as positive). The respiratory system was
more frequently affected (74 cases), followed by mouth and
throat (n ¼ 68), the neurological system (n ¼ 52), the senso-
rial system (n ¼ 39), the digestive tract (n ¼ 36), the muscu-
lar/skeletal (n ¼ 29), and cardiocirculatory systems (17 chest
symptoms, 2 circulatory). The more frequent cardiovascular
complaints included chest pain or “pressure,” arrhythmias,
and abnormal blood pressure (namely hypertension). More
speciﬁcally, blood pressure changes were reported by nearly
4% of users, wherein hypertension was the most frequent sign
that was diagnosed by physicians.

Vansickel and Eissenberg assessed plasma nicotine con-
centration, heart rate, and subjective ratings of nicotine/
product effects in eight e-cigarette users at baseline, after
10 puffs with a 30-second interpuff interval, after 1 hour after
ad libitum pufﬁng, and 2-hour afterward.24 Compared with
baseline, the concentration of plasma nicotine increased
signiﬁcantly within 5 minutes after the ﬁrst puff (up to 10
ng/mL) and persisted as increased throughout the ad libitum
pufﬁng period (from 10–over 15 ng/mL). Similarly, the heart
rate increase from 73 (cid:2) 2.0 to 78 (cid:2) 1.9 beats per minute
(bpm) 5 minutes after the ﬁrst puff, and persisted elevated
throughout the following period. At variance with previous
data, showing minimal or no nicotine delivery by e-cigarette,
this study has a much higher practical signiﬁcance, as the
e-cigarette users not only were allowed to provide their
preferred device and ﬂavor/nicotine concentration, but they
were also allowed to follow their typical pattern of consump-
tion during the 1-hour ad libitum pufﬁng period. Thus,
effective nicotine delivery had occurred under this more
“real-world” situation. A nicotinergic impact has also been
documented by Flouris et al25 who reported that the effect on
serum levels of cotinine (a metabolite of nicotine) after active
and passive e-cigarette smoking does not differ from that
generated by a conventional tobacco cigarette.

As mentioned, some case reports have been published about
the potential cardiovascular adverse effects of e-cigarettes,
mostly attributable to improper use. Monroy et al described
the case of a 70-year-old white woman with a medical history
of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, osteoarthritis, and allergic
rhinitis who developed paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation, tempo-
rally associated with e-cigarette use.26 As accurate investiga-
tions failed to show additional triggers, an improper use of a
full-strength nicotine replacement device was identiﬁed as the

Seminars in Thrombosis & Hemostasis

Vol. 40 No. 1/2014

64

E-Cigarettes and Cardiovascular Risk

Lippi et al.

most probable source of arrhythmias. In fact, the reﬁll bottle
had never lasted as long as expected by the patient, a fact that
was highly suggestive for incorrect (i.e., excessive) reﬁll of e-
cigarette cartridge, thus exposing her to a very high dose of
nicotine, which is otherwise associated with a well-established
proarrhythmic effect. When the patient ceased to use the e-
cigarette, no further episodes of paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation
were reported. We have also recently described the case of
nicotine poisoning in a 22-year-old girl, who reported to have
mixed the content of an electronic cigarette reﬁll with 60 mL of
methadone, improperly bottled in a generic vial.27 The spec-
trum of symptoms observed in the patient included tachycardia
(115 bpm and sinus tachycardia at the electrocardiograph),
hypertension (150/105 mm Hg), ﬂushing, salivation, and nau-
sea. Although the young girl had a favorable outcome, the
small volume of the reﬁll contents used highlight the serious
risk of easy ingestion or injection of harmful—potentially lethal
—doses of nicotine, thus posing a substantial threat over
widespread and under regulated marketing of these devices
and their reﬁlls (e.g., a typical 30 mL bottle reﬁll solution may
contain up to 18 mg/mL nicotine, which approximately corre-
sponds to 540 mg of nicotine).

Conclusions

Strongly propelled by easy availability through the Web, the
worldwide market of e-cigarettes continues to grow, despite
limited information on their safety, adverse effects, and even
efﬁcacy for smoking cessation. Although e-cigarettes are
expected to generate and/or release fewer dangerous sub-
stances than conventional tobacco cigarettes, and current
evidence provides limited support for a comparative lessened
increased cardiovascular risk in current users, there are some
important issues that should be emphasized about the cur-
rently claimed safety of these devices.

Thus, although the use of e-cigarette appears more favor-
able than traditional cigarettes or smokeless tobacco prod-
ucts, recent data conversely attests that the more typical
patterns of use may be associated with signiﬁcant release of
nicotine,24 thus producing a plasma nicotine concentration
which may ultimately approximate that of traditional ciga-
rette smoking, because the minute nicotine particles con-
tained in the vapor allow fast and effective delivery into the
bloodstream. This would explain the enhanced risk of cardiac
arrhythmias and hypertension, which may predispose some
users—especially those with coronary atherosclerosis or
other known cardiovascular risk factors—to a substantial
risk of acute coronary syndrome, which may be further
magniﬁed by other potential adverse effects (i.e., arrhyth-
mias, increased respiratory, and ﬂow respiratory resistance)
(►Fig. 3). Some cases of intoxication, wherein an amount of
nicotine and other harmful compounds may be absorbed at a
much larger extent than with traditional cigarettes, have also
been reported. According to this data, e-cigarettes have been
classiﬁed as “drug delivery devices” in several countries, and
their marketing has been temporarily limited or even sus-
pended until safety proﬁle and efﬁcacy will be ﬁnally estab-
lished in clinical trials. The US Food and Drug Administration

Seminars in Thrombosis & Hemostasis

Vol. 40 No. 1/2014

Fig. 3 Potentially harmful effects of electronic cigarettes on human
biology.

has also publicly discouraged the use of these devices in
July 2009, raising serious concerns that e-cigarettes may be
marketed to young people and lack appropriate health
warnings.

Basically, their large and easy availability on the Web, a
phenomenon that has several points in common with the
“black market” of doping substances,28,29 combined with the
existence of a clear dose–response relationship effect on
cardiovascular risk suggests that major caution regarding
the use of these devices should be used, especially in persons
at increased risk of developing cardiovascular events. The
effects on blood pressure and heart rate are particularly
concerning, as hypertension is a well-established cardiovas-
cular risk factor,2 whereas heart rate is a signiﬁcant predictor
of mortality in patients with known cardiovascular disease.30
It is also noteworthy that e-cigarettes require stronger vacu-
ums (suction) than conventional tobacco cigarette, and this
effect remains unclear on enhanced absorption of dangerous
substances and human health.31 As the use of e-cigarettes is
continuously rising, and it may be a potentially effective
approach for smoking cessation, more focused research is
urgently needed to deﬁnitely establish the cardiovascular
safety of these devices. Should e-cigarettes be less harmful
than traditional tobacco smoking or smokeless tobacco, then
this would represent a favorable alternative for tobacco
addictions, but may conversely pose serious threat on more
fragile members of the society such as children and teens,
who may be persuaded to start using electronic cigarette with
unproven assumption of safety, become addicted to nicotine
and eventually begin to smoke tobacco cigarettes, or worse
abuse the level of active compounds in reﬁll bottles with
potential catastrophic outcome.

References
1 Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al; American Heart Associa-
tion Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee.
Heart disease and stroke statistics—2013 update: a report from
the American Heart Association. Circulation 2013;127(1):
e6–e245

E-Cigarettes and Cardiovascular Risk

Lippi et al.

65

2 Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al; American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment
of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2010;
122(25):e584–e636

3 Piano MR, Benowitz NL, Fitzgerald GA, et al; American Heart
Association Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Impact of smokeless
tobacco products on cardiovascular disease: implications for policy,
prevention, and treatment: a policy statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 2010;122(15):1520–1544

4 Cobb NK, Abrams DB. E-cigarette or drug-delivery device? Regu-
lating novel nicotine products. N Engl J Med 2011;365(3):193–195
5 Etter JF, Bullen C, Flouris AD, Laugesen M, Eissenberg T. Electronic
nicotine delivery systems: a research agenda. Tob Control 2011;
20(3):243–248

6 Hadwiger ME, Trehy ML, Ye W, Moore T, Allgire J, Westenberger B.
Identiﬁcation of amino-tadalaﬁl and rimonabant in electronic
cigarette products using high pressure liquid chromatography
with diode array and tandem mass spectrometric detection. J
Chromatogr A 2010;1217(48):7547–7555

7 Etter JF, Zäther E, Svensson S. Analysis of reﬁll liquids for electronic

cigarettes. Addiction 2013;108(9):1671–1679

8 Cameron JM, Howell DN, White JR, Andrenyak DM, Layton ME, Roll
JM. Variable and potentially fatal amounts of nicotine in e-ciga-
rette nicotine solutions. Tob Control 2013; [Epub ahead of print]
9 Kim HJ, Shin HS. Determination of tobacco-speciﬁc nitrosamines in
replacement liquids of electronic cigarettes by liquid chromatogra-
phy-tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 2013;1291:48–55
10 Williams M, Villarreal A, Bozhilov K, Lin S, Talbot P. Metal and
silicate particles including nanoparticles are present in electronic
cigarette cartomizer ﬂuid and aerosol. PLoS ONE 2013;8(3):e57987
11 Bullen C, McRobbie H, Thornley S, Glover M, Lin R, Laugesen M.
Effect of an electronic nicotine delivery device (e cigarette) on desire
to smoke and withdrawal, user preferences and nicotine delivery:
randomised cross-over trial. Tob Control 2010;19(2):98–103
12 Vansickel AR, Cobb CO, Weaver MF, Eissenberg TE. A clinical
laboratory model for evaluating the acute effects of electronic
“cigarettes”: nicotine delivery proﬁle and cardiovascular and
subjective effects. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2010;
19(8):1945–1953

13 Schripp T, Markewitz D, Uhde E, Salthammer T. Does e-cigarette
consumption cause passive vaping? Indoor Air 2013;23(1):25–31
14 Ingebrethsen BJ, Cole SK, Alderman SL. Electronic cigarette aerosol
Inhal Toxicol 2012;

particle size distribution measurements.
24(14):976–984

15 Goniewicz ML, Kuma T, Gawron M, Knysak J, Kosmider L. Nicotine
levels in electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res 2013;15(1):158–166

16 Dawkins L, Turner J, Roberts A, Soar K.

’Vaping’ proﬁles and
preferences: an online survey of electronic cigarette users. Addic-
tion 2013;108(6):1115–1125

17 Dockrell M, Morrison R, Bauld L, McNeill A. E-cigarettes: preva-
lence and attitudes in Great Britain. Nicotine Tob Res 2013;15(10):
1737–1744 [Epub ahead of print]

18 Yatsuya H, Folsom AR; ARIC Investigators. Risk of incident cardio-
vascular disease among users of smokeless tobacco in the Athero-
sclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Am J Epidemiol 2010;
172(5):600–605

19 Boffetta P, Straif K. Use of smokeless tobacco and risk of myocardial
infarction and stroke: systematic review with meta-analysis. BMJ
2009;339:b3060

20 Vardavas CI, Anagnostopoulos N, Kougias M, Evangelopoulou V,
Connolly GN, Behrakis PK. Short-term pulmonary effects of using an
electronic cigarette: impact on respiratory ﬂow resistance, imped-
ance, and exhaled nitric oxide. Chest 2012;141(6):1400–1406
21 Gennimata SA, Palamidas A, Kaltsakas G, et al. Acute effect of e-
cigarette on pulmonary function in healthy subjects and smokers.
[Abstract]Eur Respir J 2012;40(Suppl 56):189S

22 Farsalinos K, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, et al. Acute effects of using
an electronic nicotine-delivery device (e-cigarette) on myocardial
.
function: comparison with the effects of regular cigarettes.
[Abstract]Eur Heart J 2012;33(Suppl 1):203

23 Hua M, Alﬁ M, Talbot P. Health-related effects reported by elec-
tronic cigarette users in online forums. J Med Internet Res 2013;
15(4):e59

24 Vansickel AR, Eissenberg T. Electronic cigarettes: effective nicotine
delivery after acute administration. Nicotine Tob Res 2013;15(1):
267–270

25 Flouris AD, Chorti MS, Poulianiti KP, et al. Acute impact of active
and passive electronic cigarette smoking on serum cotinine and
lung function. Inhal Toxicol 2013;25(2):91–101

26 Monroy AE, Hommel E, Smith ST, Raji M. Paroxysmal atrial
ﬁbrillation following electronic cigarette use in an elderly woman.
Clin Geriatr 2012;20(3):28–32

27 Cervellin G, Luci M, Bellini C, Lippi G. Bad news about an old poison. A
case of nicotine poisoning due to both ingestion and injection of the
content of an electronic cigarette reﬁll. Emerg Care J 2013;9(2):
28 Lippi G, Franchini M, Banﬁ G. Biochemistry and physiology of
anabolic androgenic steroids doping. Mini Rev Med Chem 2011;
11(5):362–373

29 Lippi G, Banﬁ G. Doping and thrombosis in sports. Semin Thromb

Hemost 2011;37(8):918–928

30 Lippi G, Sanchis-Gomar F, Cervellin G. Rest heart rate and mortality:
more physical exercise for the rabbit? Int J Cardiol 2013;165(2):358
31 Trtchounian A, Williams M, Talbot P. Conventional and electronic
cigarettes (e-cigarettes) have different smoking characteristics.
Nicotine Tob Res 2010;12(9):905–912

Seminars in Thrombosis & Hemostasis

Vol. 40 No. 1/2014

