Contemporary Reviews in Cardiovascular Medicine

E-Cigarettes
A Scientific Review

Rachel Grana, PhD, MPH; Neal  Benowitz, MD;  Stanton A. Glantz, PhD

Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) are products that deliver 

a nicotine-containing aerosol (commonly called vapor) to 
users  by  heating  a  solution  typically  made  up  of  propylene 
glycol  or  glycerol  (glycerin),  nicotine,  and  flavoring  agents 
(Figure 1) invented in their current form by Chinese pharma-
cist Hon  Lik in the early 2000s.1 The US patent  application 
describes the e-cigarette device as “an electronic atomization 
cigarette that functions as substitutes [sic] for quitting smok-
ing and cigarette substitutes” (patent No. 8,490,628 B2). By 
2013, the major multinational tobacco companies had entered 
the  e-cigarette  market.  E-cigarettes  are  marketed  via  televi-
sion, the Internet, and print advertisements (that often feature 
celebrities)2  as  healthier  alternatives  to  tobacco  smoking,  as 
useful for quitting smoking and reducing cigarette consump-
tion, and as a way to circumvent smoke-free laws by enabling 
users to “smoke anywhere.”3

There  has  been  rapid  market  penetration  of  e-cigarettes 
despite many unanswered questions about their safety, effi-
cacy for harm reduction and cessation, and total impact on 
public health. E-cigarette products are changing quickly, and 
many of the findings from studies of older products may not 
be  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  newer  products  that  could 
be safer and more effective as nicotine delivery devices. In 
addition, marketing and other environmental influences may 
vary from country to country, so patterns of use and the ulti-
mate impact on public health may differ. The individual risks 
and benefits and the total impact of these products occur in 
the  context  of  the  widespread  and  continuing  availability 
of conventional cigarettes and other tobacco products, with 
high levels of dual use of e-cigarettes and conventional ciga-
rettes  at  the  same  time  among  adults4–8  and  youth.9–11  It  is 
important  to  assess  e-cigarette  toxicant  exposure  and  indi-
vidual  risk,  as  well  as  the  health  effects,  of  e-cigarettes  as 
they  are  actually  used  to  ensure  safety  and  to  develop  an 
evidence-based  regulatory  scheme  that  protects  the  entire 
population—children  and  adults,  smokers  and  nonsmok-
ers—in the context of how the tobacco industry is marketing 
and promoting these products. Health claims and claims of 
efficacy for quitting smoking are unsupported by the scien-
tific  evidence  to  date.  To  minimize  the  potential  negative 

impacts on prevention and cessation and the undermining of 
existing tobacco control measures,  e-cigarette use should be 
prohibited where tobacco cigarette use is prohibited, and the 
products should be subject to the same marketing restrictions 
as tobacco cigarettes.

Methods
Initial  searches  conducted  via  PubMed  using  the  key  words  elec-
tronic cigarette, e-cigarette, and electronic nicotine delivery systems 
yielded 151 studies (Figure 2). Seventy-one articles presented origi-
nal  data  and  were  included.  Eighty  articles  were  excluded  because 
they were not relevant, were not in English, or were reviews or com-
mentaries that did not provide original data, although some are cited 
for  background  and  context.  Searches  using  the  same  search  terms 
were conducted using World Health Organization regional databases; 
only BIBLIOTECA Virtual em Salude Latin America and Caribbean 
included relevant papers, all of which had already been located with 
PubMed. Working with the World Health Organization, we also con-
tacted investigators to locate other studies, some of which had not yet 
been published (submitted or in press). We also reviewed technical 
reports prepared by health organizations,12–15 news articles, and rel-
evant Web sites. The results of these searches were used to prepare 
a  report  commissioned  by  the World  Health  Organization  Tobacco 
Free Initiative, which provides details of individual studies, including 
some studies that are not discussed in this article because of length 
constraints.1 After  the  manuscript  was  submitted  for  peer  review,  5 
more articles became available, resulting in a total of 82 articles form-
ing the basis for this review.

The Product
E-cigarette  devices  are  manufactured  mainly  in  China. As 
of late 2013, there was wide variability in e-cigarette prod-
uct  engineering,  including  varying  nicotine  concentrations 
in  the  solution  used  to  generate  the  nicotine  aerosol  (also 
called e-liquid), varying volumes of solution in the product, 
different  carrier  compounds  (most  commonly  propylene 
glycol with or without glycerol [glycerin]), a wide range of 
additives  and  flavors,  and  battery  voltage.  Quality  control 
is  variable,16  and  users  can  modify  many  of  the  products, 
including  using  them  to  deliver  other  drugs  such  as  mari-
juana.17,18 These engineering differences result in variability 
in how e-cigarettes heat and convert the nicotine solution to 
an aerosol and consequently the levels of nicotine and other 

From the Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education (R.G., N.B., S.A.G.) and Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular Research Institute 

(N.B., S.A.G.), University of California, San Francisco.

Correspondence to Stanton A. Glantz, PhD, Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education, University of California, San Francisco, 530 Parnassus 

Ave, No. 366, San Francisco, CA 94143-1390. E-mail glantz@medicine.ucsf.edu

(Circulation. 2014;129:1972-1986.)
© 2014 The Authors. Circulation is published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wolters Kluwer. This is an open access article under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial-NoDervis License, which permits use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided that the Contribution is properly cited, the use is non-commercial, and no modifications or adaptations are made.

Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org 

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.007667

1972

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1973

Figure 1. Examples of different electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) products. Reproduced from Grana et al.1

chemicals delivered to users and the air pollution generated 
by the exhaled aerosol.19

E-liquids are flavored, including tobacco, menthol, coffee, 
fruit,  candy,  and  alcohol  flavors,  as  well  as  unusual  flavors 
such  as  cola  and  Belgian  waffle.3  Flavored  (conventional) 
tobacco  products  are  used  disproportionately  by  youth  and 
initiators,20 and cigarettes with characterizing flavors (except 
menthol) have been banned in the United States.

Marketing and Media Research
Consumer perceptions of the risks and benefits and deci-
sions  to  use  e-cigarettes  are  heavily  influenced  by  how 
they  are  marketed.  Celebrities  have  been  used  to  mar-
ket  e-cigarettes  since  at  least  2009.21  Grana  and  Ling3 
reviewed  59   single-brand  e-cigarette  retail  Web  sites  in 
2012 and found that the most popular claims were that the 
products are healthier (95%), cheaper (93%), and cleaner 
(95%)  than  cigarettes;  can  be  smoked  anywhere  (88%); 
can be used to circumvent smoke-free policies (71%); do 
not  produce  secondhand  smoke  (76%);  and  are  modern 
(73%). Health claims made through text and pictorial and 
video  representations  of  doctors  were  present  on  22%  of 
sites.  Cessation-related  claims  (direct  and  indirect  state-
ments) were found on 64% of sites. Marketing on the sites 
commonly stated that e-cigarettes produce only “harmless 

water  vapor.”  Similar  messaging  strategies  were  being 
used in the United Kingdom.22

These marketing messages have been repeated in the media. 
A  thematic  analysis  of  newspaper  and  online  media  cover-
age  about  e-cigarettes  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Scotland 
from  July  2007  to  June  2012  found  5  themes:  healthier 
choice, circumventing smoke-free restrictions, celebrity use, 
price,  and  risk  and  uncertainty.23  Coverage  often  included 
anecdotes  about  having  tried  nicotine  replacement  therapies 
(NRTs), failing to quit, and then trying the e-cigarette (such 
as  the  celebrity  endorsement  by  actress  Katherine  Heigl  on 
the US David Letterman television program21), implying that 
 e-cigarettes are a more effective form of NRT.

E-cigarette companies also have a strong presence in social 
media, which reinforces their marketing messages, including 
repeating  the  use  of  celebrity  endorsements  (eg,  Heigl)  and 
spreading images of the UK musical group Girls Aloud “puff-
ing on e-cigarettes to cope with the stress of their 10th anni-
versary tour.”22

Cigarette and other tobacco companies have been unable to 
market their products on television and radio since the 1970s. 
E-cigarette advertising on television and radio is mass market-
ing of an addictive nicotine product for use in a recreational 
manner to new generations who have never experienced such 
marketing.  In  an  online  convenience  sample  of  519  adult 

1974 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

Figure 2. Studies screened and selected for inclusion. PRISMA indicates Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses.

smokers  and  recent  quitters  who  viewed  a  television  com-
mercial for Blu e-cigarettes, 76% of current smokers reported 
that  the  ad  made  them  think  about  smoking  cigarettes,  74% 
reported it made them think about quitting, and 66% said it 
made them likely to try an e-cigarette in the future.24 The 34% 
of  participants  who  had  used  e-cigarettes  were  significantly 
more  likely  to  think  about  smoking  cigarettes  after  viewing 
the ad than nonusers (83% and 72%, respectively), suggesting 
that viewing an e-cigarette commercial may induce thoughts 
about smoking and cue the urge to smoke.24

Prevalence
Awareness  of  e-cigarettes  and  e-cigarette  trial  have  at  least 
doubled among both adults and adolescents in several coun-
tries  from  2008  to  2012.  In  the  United  States,  awareness 
is  more  prevalent  among  men,  but  trying  e-cigarettes  is 
more  prevalent  among  women. Almost  the  same  percent  of 
European  Union  and  US  adult  respondents  to  national  sur-
veys  reported  having  tried  e-cigarettes  (7%  in  2012  versus 
6.2%  in  2011,  respectively).5,25 All  population-based  studies 
of  adult  use  show  the  highest  rate  of  e-cigarette  use  among 
current smokers, followed by former smokers, with little use 
among  nonsmokers,  although  e-cigarette  trial  and  use  rose 
in all of these categories.4–6 Etter and Bullen26 followed up a 
sample of e-cigarette users recruited from Web sites dedicated 
to e-cigarettes and smoking cessation, most (72%) of whom 
were former smokers at baseline. At the 1-year follow up, 6% 
of former smokers who were daily e-cigarette users at base-
line relapsed to smoking cigarettes, and almost all (92%) of 

the former smokers using e-cigarettes daily at baseline were 
still  using  e-cigarettes  daily  at  follow-up.  Among  36  dual 
users at baseline, 16 (44%) had stopped smoking after 1 year. 
The  epidemiological,  population-based  studies  indicate  that, 
across countries, e-cigarettes are most commonly being used 
concurrently with conventional tobacco cigarettes (dual use). 
Consistent with marketing messages, the most common rea-
sons given for trying e-cigarettes are for use in places where 
smoking is restricted, to cut down on smoking, and for help 
with quitting smoking.6,27–30

Choi  and  Forster31  followed  up  a  cohort  of  Midwestern 
young adults (mean age, 24.1 years) who had never used e-cig-
arettes from 2010 to 2011 and found that 21.6% of baseline 
current smokers, 11.9% of baseline former smokers, and 2.9% 
of baseline nonsmokers reported having ever used e-cigarettes 
at follow-up. Those who believed at baseline that e-cigarettes 
could  help  with  quitting  smoking  and  perceived  e-cigarettes 
to be less harmful than cigarettes were more likely to report 
experimenting  with  e-cigarettes  at  follow-up  (adjusted  odds 
ratio [OR], 1.98; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.29–3.04; and 
adjusted OR, 2.34; 95% CI, 1.49–3.69, respectively).

Data  on  e-cigarette  use  among  adolescents  are  more  lim-
ited but, like for adults, show rapid increases in awareness and 
use in 5 countries (United States, Poland, Latvia, Finland, and 
Korea), with higher rates of trial and current use in European 
countries  than  the  United  States  or  Korea.9,10,32,33  In  Korea, 
youth ever use of e-cigarettes rose from 0.5% in 2008 to 9.4% 
in 2011,10 and in the United States, it rose from 3.3% in 2011 
to 6.8% in 2012.9 As with adult population-based studies, data 

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1975

suggest  that  e-cigarette  use  is  most  appealing  and  prevalent 
among youth who are also experimenting with or are current 
users of tobacco cigarettes. Dual use with conventional ciga-
rettes is the predominant pattern of e-cigarette use: 61% in US 
middle school students and 80% among US high school stu-
dents in 2011.9 These results indicate rapid market penetration 
of e-cigarettes among youth, with trial among US high school 
students (10.0%) in 2012 even higher than the 2011 rate for 
adults (6.2%).5 Despite a law prohibiting e-cigarette sales to 
minors, e-cigarette use among Utah youth (grades 8, 10, and 
12) tripled between 2011 and 2013, with youth 3 times more 
likely to report current e-cigarette use than adults.34

Although dual use with cigarettes is high, some youth exper-
imenting with e-cigarettes have never tried a tobacco cigarette, 
which indicates that some youth are initiating use of nicotine, 
an addictive drug, with e-cigarettes. In 2012, 20.3% of middle 
school and 7.2% of high school ever e-cigarette users reported 
never smoking conventional cigarettes.9 Similarly, in 2011 in 
Korea, 15% of students in grades 7 through 12 who had ever 
used  e-cigarettes  had  never  smoked  a  cigarette.10  The  Utah 
Department of Health found that 32% of ever e-cigarette users 
reported that they had never smoked conventional cigarettes.34

E-Cigarette E-Fluid and Vapor

Chemical Constituents
The  nicotine  content  of  the  cartridge  e-liquid  from  some 
brands revealed poor concordance of labeled and actual nico-
tine content.35–39 Simulated e-cigarette use revealed that indi-
vidual  puffs  contained  from  0  to  35  μg  nicotine  per  puff.37 
Assuming  a  high  nicotine  delivery  of  30  μg  per  puff,  it 
would  take  ≈30  puffs  to  deliver  the  1  mg  nicotine  typically 
delivered by smoking a conventional cigarette. A puff of the 
e-cigarette with the highest nicotine content contained 20% of 
the nicotine contained in a puff of a conventional cigarette.37 
Actual  nicotine  delivery  from  an  e-cigarette  would  likely 
be  affected  by  users’  smoking  behavior. An  analysis  of  UK 
brand  e-cigarettes and the resulting aerosol demonstrated that, 
across brands, nicotine content of the e-liquid in the cartridges 
was not significantly correlated with the amount found in the 

resulting  aerosol,  indicating  differences  in  the  engineering 
characteristics  of  the  device  that  strongly  influence  nicotine 
delivery even with a consistent puffing protocol.40

Goniewicz  et  al41  analyzed  the  aerosol  from  12  brands  of 
e-cigarettes, a conventional cigarette, and a nicotine inhaler for 
toxic and carcinogenic compounds. The levels of toxicants in 
the aerosol were 1 to 2 orders of magnitude lower than in ciga-
rette smoke but higher than with a nicotine inhaler (Table 1).

Kim and Shin42 analyzed the tobacco-specific nitrosamines 
NNN,  NNK,  and  NAT  and  total  tobacco-specific  nitrosa-
mines in 105 refill fluids from 11  companies  in the Korean 
market  and  found  nearly  a  3-order-of-magnitude  variation 
in  tobacco-specific  nitrosamine  concentrations,  with  total 
tobacco-specific nitrosamine concentration ranging from 330 
to 8600 μg/mL.

Cytotoxicity
Bahl et al43 screened 41 e-cigarette refill fluids from 4 com-
panies for cytotoxicity using 3 cell types: human pulmonary 
fibroblasts,  human  embryonic  stem  cells,  and  mouse  neural 
stem  cells.  Cytotoxicity  varied  among  products  from  highly 
toxic to low or no cytotoxicity. The authors determined that 
nicotine did not cause cytotoxicity, that some products were 
noncytotoxic  to  pulmonary  fibroblasts  but  cytotoxic  to  both 
types  of  stem  cells,  and  that  cytotoxicity  was  related  to  the 
concentration  and  number  of  flavorings  used.  The  finding 
that the stem cells  are more sensitive than the differentiated 
adult pulmonary fibroblasts cells suggests that adult lungs are 
probably  not  the  most  sensitive  system  to  assess  the  effects 
of  exposure  to  e-cigarette  aerosol.  These  findings  also  raise 
concerns about pregnant women who use e-cigarettes or are 
exposed to secondhand e-cigarette aerosol.

In a study funded by the FlavorArt e-cigarette liquid man-
ufacturers,  Romagna  et  al44  compared  the  cytotoxicity  of 
aerosol  produced  from  21  nicotine-containing,  flavored  (12 
tobacco  flavored  and  9  fruit  or  candied  flavored)  brands  of 
e-cigarette  liquid  with  smoke  from  a  conventional  cigarette 
using  embryonic  mouse  fibroblast  cells.  Only  aerosol  from 
coffee-flavored e-liquid produced a cytotoxic effect (average, 
51% viability at 100% concentration of solution).

Table 1.  Levels of Toxicants in E-Cigarette Aerosol Compared With Nicotine Inhaler and Cigarette Smoke

Toxicant

Formaldehyde, μg

Acetaldehyde, μg

Acrolein, μg

o-Methylbenzaldehyde, μg

Toluene, μg

p,m-xylene, μg

NNN, ng

NNK, ng

Cadmium, ng

Nickel, ng

Lead, ng

Range in Content in Aerosol  
From 12 E-Cigarette  
Samples per 15 Puffs*

Range in Content in Conventional 
Cigarette Micrograms in Mainstream 
Smoke From 1 Cigarette

Content in Nicotine  
Inhaler Mist  
per 15 Puffs*

0.2–5.61

0.11–1.36

0.07–4.19

0.13–0.71

ND–0.63

ND–0.2

ND–0.00043

ND–0.00283

ND–0.022

0.011–0.029

0.003–0.057

1.6–52

52–140

2.4–62

…

8.3–70

…

0.0005–0.19

0.012–0.11

…

…

…

0.2

0.11

ND

0.07

ND

ND

ND

ND

0.003

0.019

0.004

Prepared using data from Goniewicz et al.41 E-cigarette indicates electronic cigarette; and ND, not determined.

1976 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

Farsalinos et al45 tested cytotoxicity in cultured rat cardiac 
myoblasts  of  exposure  to  aerosol  generated  from  20  refill 
solutions  from  5  manufacturers  containing  6  to  24  mg/mL 
nicotine in various flavors, a “base”-only solution (50% pro-
pylene glycol and 50% glycerol), and conventional cigarette 
smoke. The aerosol from 3 fluids was cytotoxic at 100% and 
50%  dilution;  2  were  tobacco  flavored  and  1  was  cinnamon 
cookie flavored. Cigarette smoke was cytotoxic at 100% and 
all dilutions except 6.25%.

Secondhand Exposure
E-cigarettes do not burn or smolder the way conventional cig-
arettes do, so they do not emit side-stream smoke; however, 
bystanders are exposed to aerosol exhaled by the user. Schripp 
et  al46  conducted  chamber  studies  in  which  subjects  used  3 
e-liquids (0 mg nicotine, apple flavor; 18 mg nicotine, apple 
flavor;  18  mg  nicotine,  tobacco  flavor)  and  1  tobacco  ciga-
rette and measured levels of several toxins and nicotine in the 
resulting aerosol. Three e-cigarette devices were used for these 
experiments: 2 that used a tank system that is directly filled 
with e-liquid and one that used a cartridge with a cotton fiber 
on which to drip the liquid. They found low levels of form-
aldehyde, acetaldehyde, isoprene, acetic acid,  2-butanodione, 
acetone, propanol, propylene glycol, and diacetin (from flavor-
ing), traces of apple oil (3- methylbutyl-3-methylbutanoate), 
and nicotine (with differing levels depending on the specific 
protocols) emitted into the air. Toxins in the e-cigarette aero-
sol were at much lower levels compared with the conventional 
cigarette emissions.46

In  another  chamber  study,  Flouris  et  al47  compared  emis-
sions  of  conventional  cigarettes  and  e-cigarettes  in  condi-
tions designed to approximate a smoky bar (target air CO of 
23  ppm)  using  machine-smoked  e-cigarettes  and  cigarettes. 
E-cigarette aerosol (using a single brand of e-cigarette made 
in Greece and a single e-liquid with at least 60% propylene 
glycol, 11 mg/mL nicotine) was generated with a pump that 
operated for the same duration as the cigarette smoking, and 
aerosol was released into the room. (A person inhaling a nico-
tine  aerosol  usually  absorbs  80%  of  the  nicotine,48  whereas 
the pump discharges all nicotine into the environment, so the 
nicotine exposure may be higher in this study than would be 
the  case  with  actual  secondhand  aerosol  exposure.)  Serum 
cotinine in nonsmokers sitting in the chamber was similar for 
cigarette  smoke  and  e-cigarette  aerosol  exposure  (average,  
0.8 ng/mL for tobacco cigarette and 0.5 ng/mL for e-cigarette).
Schober  et  al39  measured  indoor  pollution  from  3  people 
using  e-cigarettes  over  a  2-hour  period  in  a  realistic  envi-
ronment  modeled  on  a  café.  They  found  elevated  nicotine, 
1,2-propanediol,  glycerin,  aluminum,  and  7  polycyclic  aro-
matic hydrocarbons classified as probable carcinogens by the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer in the room air.
Czogala et al49 conducted a chamber study of secondhand 
exposure to e-cigarette aerosol compared with cigarette smoke, 
finding that, on average, bystanders would be exposed to nico-
tine  but  at  levels  1/10th  that  of  cigarette  smoke   (e-cigarette 
aerosol, 3.32±2.49 μg/m3; cigarette smoke, 31.60±6.91 μg/m3; 
P=0.008). Both e-cigarette aerosol and cigarette smoke con-
tained fine particles (PM2.5), with e-cigarette aerosol particle 
concentrations  ranging  from  6.6  to  85.0  μg/m3.  E-cigarette 

aerosol was not a source of exposure to carbon monoxide, a 
key combustion element of conventional cigarette smoke.

Particulate Matter
E-cigarettes  deliver  nicotine  by  creating  an  aerosol  of  ultra-
fine  particles.  Fine  particles  can  be  variable  and  chemically 
complex, and the specific components responsible for toxic-
ity  and  the  relative  importance  of  particle  size  and  particle 
composition  are  generally  not  known.50  Given  these  uncer-
tainties,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  ultrafine  particles  deliv-
ered by e-cigarettes have health effects and toxicity similar to 
the ambient fine particles generated by conventional cigarette 
smoke or secondhand smoke. There is strong evidence, how-
ever, that frequent low or short-term levels of exposure to fine 
and ultrafine particles from tobacco smoke or air pollution can 
contribute to pulmonary and systemic inflammatory processes 
and increase the risk of cardiovascular and respiratory disease 
and death.51–54

Fuoco  et  al55  examined  particle  number  concentration 
and  distribution  and  performed  a  volatility  analysis  of  the 
 e-cigarette aerosol generated from 3 devices (2 rechargeable 
and 1 disposable) using 4 refill e-liquids with varying levels 
of  nicotine  and  flavorants.  They  found  that  higher  e-liquid 
nicotine content was associated with higher particle numbers 
in the resulting aerosol, with little effect on the particle size 
distribution.  Longer  puffing  time  resulted  in  more  particles. 
Flavor  was  not  associated  with  differences  in  particle  num-
ber  or  size  distribution.  Consistent  with  other  studies,46,56–58 
the particle size distribution (range of modes, ≈120–165 nm) 
was  similar  to  that  of  conventional  cigarettes,  with  some 
 e-cigarettes delivering more particles than conventional ciga-
rettes (Figure 3).

Zhang et al57 examined the size of e-cigarette aerosol par-
ticles and likely deposition in the human body (using a single 
brand,  BloogMaxXFusion)  with  both  propylene  glycol  and 
vegetable glycerin-based liquids. Using particle size and lung 
ventilation rates (1 for a “reference worker” and 1 for a “heavy 
worker”: 1.2 and 1.688 m3/h, respectively), their human depo-
sition  model  estimated  that  73%  to  80%  of  particles  would 
be  distributed  into  the  exhaled  aerosol,  whereas  9%  to  18% 
of particles would be deposited in alveoli resulting in arterial 
delivery, and 9% to 17% would be deposited in the head and 
airways, resulting in venous delivery. As expected, the heavy 
worker  model  showed  more  alveolar  delivery  across  puffs 
compared  with  the  reference  worker,  who  would  have  more 
head and airway delivery. In total, ≈20% to 27% of particles 
are  estimated  to  be  deposited  in  the  circulatory  system  and 
into organs from e-cigarette aerosol, which is comparable to 
the 25% to 35% for conventional cigarette smoke.

In  their  study  of  passive  exposure  to  exhaled  e-cigarette 
aerosol  in  a  simulated  café,  Schober  et  al39  found  that  con-
centrations of fine particles in the air increased from a median 
of  400  particles  per  1  cm3  with  people  simply  sitting  in  the 
room for 2 hours to medians of 49 000 to 88 000 particles per 
1 cm3 (depending on the e-cigarette fluid used) after 2 hours of 
e-cigarette use in the same room

Both  the  e-liquid  and  the  Poly-fil  fibers  that  are  used  to 
absorb the e-liquid for heating and conversion to an aerosol 
come into contact with heating elements that contain heavy 

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1977

Figure 3. Particle number distribution from (A) 
mainstream aerosol in e-liquid 1 and from (B) con-
ventional cigarette. Reproduced from Fuoco et al55 
with permission from the publisher. Copyright © 
2013 Elsevier Ltd.

metals (tin, nickel, copper, lead, chromium). Williams et al58 
found  heavy  metals  in  samples  of  e-cigarette  liquids  and 
aerosol. Tin, which appeared to originate from solder joints, 
was found as both particles and tin whiskers in the fluid and 
Poly-fil, and e-cigarette fluid containing tin was cytotoxic to 
human  pulmonary  fibroblasts.  E-cigarette  aerosol  also  con-
tained other metals, including nickel, 2 to 100 times higher 
than found in Marlboro cigarette smoke. The nickel and chro-
mium nanoparticles (<100 nm) possibly originated from the 
heating element. It is likely that engineering features, includ-
ing the nature of the battery, the heating temperature of the 
liquid,  and  the  type  of  heating  element  and  reservoir,  will 
influence the nature, number, and size of particles produced. 
These  metal  nanoparticles  can  deposit  into  alveolar  sacs  in 
the  lungs,  potentially  causing  local  respiratory  toxicity  and 
entering the bloodstream.

In  summary,  the  particle  size  distribution  and  number  of 
particles delivered by e-cigarettes are similar to those of con-
ventional cigarettes, with most particles in the ultrafine range 
(modes,  ≈100–200  nm).  Particle  delivery  appears  to  depend 
on the nicotine level in the e-cigarette fluid but not the pres-
ence  of  flavors.  Smokers  exhale  some  of  these  particles, 
which exposes bystanders to “passive vaping.” Like cigarettes, 
 e-cigarette particles are small enough to reach deep into the 

lungs and cross into the systemic circulation. At a minimum, 
these  studies  show  that  e-cigarette  aerosol  is  not  merely 
“water vapor” as is often claimed in the marketing for these 
products.  Tests  on  e-cigarettes  show  much  lower  levels  of 
most toxicants, but not particles, than conventional cigarettes. 
The  thresholds  for  human  toxicity  of  potential  toxicants  in 
 e-cigarette vapor are not known, and the possibility of health 
risks to primary users of the products and those exposed pas-
sively to their emissions must be considered.

Nicotine Absorption
Early  studies  of  nicotine  absorption  in  2010  found  that 
 e-cigarettes  delivered  much  lower  levels  of  plasma  nicotine 
than conventional cigarettes,59,60 whereas a more recent study 
demonstrated  that  more  experienced  users  using  their  own 
product  who  engaged  in  more  puff  intervals  have  nicotine 
absorption  similar  to  that  with  conventional  cigarettes,61–63 
perhaps as a result of a combination of characteristics of the 
devices and user vaping topography.63 Another study of smok-
ers  smoking  e-cigarettes  using  a  specified  protocol  found  a 
similar  rise  in  serum  cotinine  immediately  after  use  (mean 
increase, ≈20 ng/mL).47 Several studies reported that regard-
less  of  nicotine  delivery,  e-cigarettes  can  modestly  alleviate 
some  symptoms  of  withdrawal,  and  participants  positively 

1978 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

appraised  the  use  of  e-cigarettes.62–65  In  a  study  comparing 
the nicotine inhalator and e-cigarettes,60 the nicotine inhalator 
delivered an amount of nicotine similar to that in the 16-mg 
e-cigarette;  however,  the  authors  noted  that  the  e-cigarette 
malfunctioned  and  did  not  deliver  any  nicotine  in  a  third  of 
participants. These results highlight the need for product regu-
lation in terms of drug delivery and effects, as well as device 
functioning and labeling.

Health Effects
Propylene glycol and glycerin are the main base ingredients of 
the e-liquid. Exposure to propylene glycol can cause eye and 
respiratory  irritation,  and  prolonged  or  repeated  inhalation 
in  industrial  settings  may  affect  the  central  nervous  system, 
behavior, and the spleen.66 In its product safety materials, Dow 
Chemical Company states that “inhalation exposure to [pro-
pylene glycol] mists should be avoided,”67 and the American 
Chemistry  Council  warns  against  its  use  in  theater  fogs 
because  of  the  potential  for  eye  and  respiratory  irritation.68 
When heated and vaporized, propylene glycol can form pro-
pylene oxide, an International Agency for Research on Cancer 
class 2B carcinogen,69 and glycerol forms acrolein, which can 
cause upper respiratory tract irritation.70,71

Major  injuries  and  illness  have  resulted  from  e-cigarette 
use,72 including explosions and fires.73,74 Less serious adverse 
events  include  throat  and  mouth  irritation,  cough,  nausea, 
and vomiting.72

A  study75  of  healthy  smokers’  pulmonary  function  after 
acute ad lib puffing of an e-cigarette (Nobacco, medium, 11 
mg)  for  5  minutes  (after  refraining  from  smoking  tobacco 
cigarettes for 4 hours) found no effect on spirometry but did 
find significantly increased dynamic airway resistance (18%) 
and  decreased  expired  nitric  oxide  (16%).  Sham  e-cigarette 
use had no significant effect. This study is limited by the small 
sample size, the short period of tobacco use abstinence before 
protocol execution, the short length of exposure to e-cigarette 
aerosol,  and  the  lack  of  comparison  with  smoking  conven-
tional  cigarettes.  In  addition,  smokers  in  general  have  high 
airway  resistance  with  dynamic  testing  and  lower  expired 
nitric oxide, likely as a result of oxidant stress. Despite these 
limitations, this study suggests that e-cigarette use constricts 
peripheral airways, possibly as a result of the irritant effects 
of propylene glycol, which could be of particular concern in 
people with chronic lung disease such as asthma, emphysema, 
or chronic bronchitis.

Flouris et al47 assessed the short-term effects of e-cigarette 
use  on  pulmonary  function  in  15  cigarette  smokers  who 
puffed  an  e-cigarette  (>60%  propylene  glycol,  11  mg/mL 
nicotine)  and  a  conventional  cigarette  according  to  a  speci-
fied protocol, and passive exposure to e-cigarette aerosol and 
conventional cigarette smoke with 15 never smokers. Active 
cigarette smoking resulted in a significant decrease in expired 
lung volume (forced expiratory volume in the first second of 
expiration/forced inspiratory vital capacity) that was not seen 
with active e-cigarette use or with passive tobacco cigarette or 
e-cigarette exposure. Additional analysis of the data collected 
in this study76 found that white cell count increased after ciga-
rette  smoking,  reflecting  inflammatory  process–associated 
risk for acute cardiovascular events. Active e-cigarette use and 

passive exposure to e-cigarette vapor did not result in a sig-
nificant increase in these biomarkers over 1 hour of exposure.
Schober et al39 found elevated levels of exhaled nitric oxide 
in people using a nicotine e-cigarette (but not a  nicotine-free 
e-cigarette),  which  the  authors  attributed  to  pulmonary 
inflammation.

National Vaper’s  Club,  a  pro–e-cigarette  advocacy  group, 
published a “risk assessment” of e-cigarette and cigarette use 
that concluded that “neither vapor from e-liquids or cigarette 
smoke analytes posed a condition of ‘significant risk’ of harm 
to human health via the inhalation route of exposure.”77 The 
authors failed to detect benzo(a)pyrene in conventional ciga-
rette smoke despite the fact that it is an established carcino-
gen in cigarette smoke, and their assessment of conventional 
cigarettes  concluded  that  they  did  not  pose  significant  risk, 
both of which point to fatal errors in the data, data analysis, 
or both. Another report15 funded by the Consumer Advocates 
for Smoke-free Alternatives Association and published on the 
Internet  used  occupational  threshold  limit  values  to  evalu-
ate the potential risk posed by several toxins in e-cigarettes, 
concluding  that  “there  is  no  evidence  that  vaping  produces 
inhalable exposures to contaminants of the aerosol that would 
warrant  health  concerns  by  the  standards  that  are  used  to 
ensure  safety  of  workplaces.”  Threshold  limit  values  are  an 
approach to assessing health effects for occupational chemi-
cal exposures that are generally much higher (often orders of 
magnitude higher) than levels considered acceptable for ambi-
ent  or  population-level  exposures.  Occupational  exposures 
also do not consider exposure to sensitive subgroups such as 
people  with  medical  conditions,  children,  and  infants  who 
might be exposed to secondhand e-cigarette emissions, most 
notably nicotine.

In summary, only a few studies have directly investigated 
the health effects of exposure to e-cigarette aerosol, but some 
demonstrate  the  ability  of  e-cigarette  aerosol  exposure  to 
result  in  biological  effects.  Long-term  biological  effects  are 
unknown  at  this  time  because  e-cigarettes  have  not  been  in 
widespread use long enough for assessment.

Effects on Cessation of Conventional Cigarettes
E-cigarettes  are  promoted  as  smoking  cessation  aids,  and 
many individuals who use e-cigarettes believe that they will 
help  them  quit  smoking  conventional  cigarettes.7,29,30  The 
assumption  that  e-cigarettes  will  be  as  effective  as  or  more 
effective than pharmaceutical NRTs has also motivated sup-
port  for  e-cigarettes  among  some  public  health  researchers 
and policy makers78 and (as discussed later) formed the basis 
for some public policies on the regulation of e-cigarettes.

Population-Based Studies
There  are  4  longitudinal  studies4,79–81  and  1  cross-sectional 
study82 of the association between e-cigarette use and quitting 
conventional cigarettes (Table 2).

Adkison  et  al4  studied  current  and  former  smokers  in  the 
International  Tobacco  Control  study  in  the  United  States, 
Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  and Australia  at  baseline  and 
1 year later and found that e-cigarette users had a statistically 
significant greater reduction in cigarettes per day (e-cigarette 
users, 20.1 to 16.3 cigarettes per day; nonusers, 16.9 to 15.0 

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1979

Table 2.  Population Studies of the Association Between E-Cigarette Use and Cessation of Conventional 
Cigarette Smoking

Study

Longitudinal studies

 Adkison et al4 (2013)

Location and Study Design

Odds of Quitting
(95% CI)

US, UK, Canada, Australia (ITC), surveyed, 1 y apart

0.81 (0.43–1.53)*

 Vickerman et al80 (2013)

US quit-line callers from 6 states surveyed at enrollment and 7 mo later

0.50 (0.40–0.63)†

 Grana et al79 (2014)

US sample drawn from a nationally representative Internet panel, 1 y apart

0.76 (0.36–1.60)

 Choi and Forster81 (2014)

Cross-sectional study

Midwestern young adults, 1 y apart

0.93 (0.19–4.63)

 Popova and Ling82 (2013)

US sample drawn from a nationally represented Internet panel

0.69 (0.52–0.94) *

All studies

 Pooled‡

0.61 (0.50–0.75)

CI indicates confidence interval; E-cigarette, electronic cigarette; and ITC, International Tobacco Control.
*Odds ratios obtained by contacting authors.
†Computed by authors of this report on the basis of the numbers reported.
‡Estimated  with  a  random-effects  meta-analysis  using  Stata  12.1  metan.  There  was  no  evidence  of  heterogeneity  (P=0.28)  or 

evidence of publication bias with the use of a funnel plot.

cigarettes per day). Although 85% of e-cigarette users reported 
they were using the product to quit smoking at the initial wave, 
e-cigarette users were no more likely to have quit 1 year later 
than nonusers (OR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.43–1.53; P=0.52).

Vickerman  et  al80  found  that  ≈31%  of  quit-line  callers 
surveyed  7  months  after  enrollment  reported  that  they  had 
ever tried e-cigarettes. The majority used them for <1 month 
(67.1%),  and  9.2%  were  using  them  at  the  7-month  survey. 
The  main  reason  for  e-cigarette  use  was  tobacco  cessation 
(51.3%), but it is not known whether ever use occurred as part 
of a quit attempt in the preceding 7 months. Although quit-line 
callers represent a small population of smokers motivated to 
quit, these data present a real-world estimate of the potential 
effectiveness of using e-cigarettes for cessation in a popula-
tion of smokers motivated to quit. Although this study had a 
low response rate (34.6%) and may be subject to recall bias 
because e-cigarette use and perceptions were assessed only at 
the 7-month follow-up, those who reported using e-cigarettes 
were  statistically  significantly  less  likely  to  quit  than  those 
who had not used e-cigarettes (21.7% among callers who used 
for  ≥1  month,  16.6%  among  those  who  used  for  <1  month, 
and 31.4% among never users; P<0.001). The unadjusted odds 
of quitting were statistically significantly lower for e-cigarette 
users compared with nonusers (OR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.40–0.63).
Grana  et  al79  explored  predictors  of  quitting  among  a 
national  sample  of  smokers  who  participated  in  a  study  in 
2011 and follow-up in 2012. Current e-cigarette use (past 30 
days) at baseline did not predict a greater likelihood of having 
quit at the follow-up (OR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.35–1.46). In a sec-
ond logistic regression model that included baseline cigarettes 
per day, time to first cigarette, and intention to quit, in addition 
to baseline current e-cigarette use, only intention to quit (OR, 
5.59; 95% CI, 2.41–12.98) and cigarettes per day (OR, 0.97; 
95% CI, 0.94–0.99) were significant predictors of having quit 
at follow-up; current e-cigarette use remained nonsignificant 
(OR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.36–1.60).

Choi and Forster81 followed up a cohort of young adults in 
Midwestern (recruited October 2010–March 2011 and followed 
up for 1 year). Among those who were smoking cigarettes at 

baseline, 11% of those who used e-cigarettes at least 1 day in 
the  past  30  days  at  baseline  quit  smoking  at  follow-up  com-
pared with 17% of smokers who never used e-cigarettes. In a 
logistic regression controlling for demographics and baseline 
cigarettes per day, baseline past 30-day e-cigarette use was not 
a significant predictor of having quit at follow-up (OR, 0.93; 
95%  CI,  0.19–4.63;  P=0.93).  There  was  also  no  significant 
change  in  the  number  of  conventional  cigarettes  smoked  per 
day between those who did and did not use e-cigarettes (differ-
ence, 0.2 cigarettes per day; 95% CI, −3.72 to 4.18; P=0.91).

In  a  national  cross-sectional  sample,  Popova  and  Ling82 
found that adult smokers who ever used e-cigarettes were sig-
nificantly less likely to be former smokers compared to those 
who never used e-cigarettes (OR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.52–0.94), 
controlling  for  demographics  (Lucy  Popova,  personal  com-
munication).  In  an  examination  of  only  those  who  tried  to 
quit, those who ever used  e-cigarettes were significantly less 
likely  to  be  former  smokers  than  never  users  (adjusted  OR, 
0.61; 95% CI, 0.45–0.83).

Combining these results in a random-effects meta-analysis 
(Table  2)  yields  a  pooled  OR  of  0.61  (95%  CI,  0.50–0.75), 
indicating that e-cigarette use in the real world is associated 
with significantly lower odds of quitting smoking cigarettes. 
A limitation of 3 of these studies4,80,82 is that they did not con-
trol for level of nicotine dependence. It is possible that more 
dependent smokers, who would have more difficulty quitting 
in  general,  would  be  the  ones  who  would  be  more  likely  to 
experiment  with  e-cigarettes,  which  could  contribute  to  the 
finding that e-cigarette use is associated with a lower quit rate.

Clinical Trials
Four  clinical  trials  (2  with  very  small  samples)  examined 
the efficacy of e-cigarettes for smoking cessation.83–86 Three 
trials83-85  did  not  have  a  control  group  who  were  not  using 
e-cigarettes. The other study86 compared e-cigarette efficacy 
to  a  standard-of-care  regimen  with  a  21-mg  nicotine  patch. 
None  of  the  trials  were  conducted  with  the  level  of  behav-
ioral support that accompanies most pharmaceutical trials for 
smoking cessation.

 
 
 
 
 
 
1980 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

Polosa et al83 conducted a proof-of-concept study in Italy in 
2010 with smokers18 to 60 years of age not intending to quit in 
the next 30 days. Subjects were offered Categoria e-cigarettes 
and instructed to use up to 4 cartridges (7.4-mg nicotine con-
tent) per day as desired to reduce smoking and to keep a log 
of cigarettes per day, cartridges per day, and adverse events. 
Six-month follow-up was completed with 68% of participants 
(27 of 40): 13 were using both e-cigarettes and tobacco ciga-
rettes, 5 maintained exclusive tobacco cigarette smoking, and 
9  stopped  using  tobacco  cigarettes  while  continuing  to  use 
e-cigarettes.  Cigarette  consumption  was  reduced  by  at  least 
50%  in  the  13  dual  users  (25  cigarettes  per  day  at  baseline 
to 6 cigarettes per day at 6 months; P<0.001). Polosa et al87 
continued follow-up of this sample at 18 and 24 months with 
23 subjects (58% of the original 40 enrolled). Among the 23 
participants who completed a 24-month visit, 18 continued to 
smoke, and 11 had reduced cigarette consumption by ≥50% 
with a statistically significant reduction from an average of 24 
to 4 cigarettes per day (P=0.003). Five participants had quit 
tobacco  cigarettes  at  24  months.  Study  limitations  included 
the use of a poor-quality product and the lack of a comparison 
or control group, which could make it difficult to determine 
whether quit rates achieved were not due to chance.

Caponnetto et al85 conducted a similar study with 14 smok-
ers with schizophrenia not intending to quit in the next 30 days. 
Participants  were  provided  the  same  Categoria   e-cigarette, 
and  carbon  monoxide,  product  use,  number  of  cigarettes 
smoked, and positive and negative symptoms of schizophre-
nia were assessed at baseline and 4, 8, 12, 24, and 52 weeks. 
Seven of 14 participants (50%) sustained a 50% reduction in 
the number of cigarettes per day smoked at week 52, and the 
median of 30 cigarettes per day decreased to 15 cigarettes per 
day (P=0.018). Sustained abstinence from smoking occurred 
with  2  participants  (14.3%)  by  week  52.  Positive  and  nega-
tive aspects of schizophrenia were not increased after smok-
ing  cessation.  The  most  common  outcome  was  dual  use  of 
e-cigarettes  with  conventional  cigarettes.  Study  findings  are 
not  generalizable  to  smokers  with  mental  illness  because  of 
the very small sample size and lack of a control group.

Caponnetto  et  al84  also  conducted  a 

randomized, 
 quasi-controlled trial to examine the efficacy of e-cigarettes 
of different strengths for smoking cessation and reduction in 
3 study arms: 12 weeks of treatment with the 7.2-mg nicotine 
e-cigarette, a 12-week nicotine-tapering regimen (6 weeks of 
treatment with a 7.2-mg e-cigarette and 6 weeks with a  5.4-mg 
e-cigarette),  and  a  12-week  treatment  with  a  nonnicotine 
e-cigarette.  Similar  reductions  in  the  median  cigarettes  per 
day were seen at all study visits for all 3 treatment arms (7–10 
cigarettes per day at 1 year). There was no statistically sig-
nificant difference in 6-month or 1-year quit rate among the 3 
conditions (1-year rates: 4% for placebo e-cigarette users, 9% 
for low-nicotine e-cigarette users, and 13% for high-nicotine 
e-cigarette users). The authors noted that those who initiated 
quitting  in  the  first  few  weeks  of  the  study  stayed  quitters, 
whereas  those  who  did  not  remained  dual  users  throughout 
the  study.  Twenty-six  percent  of  quitters  continued  to  use 
e-cigarettes  at  1  year.  Problems  with  the  study  include  the 
lack of a control group not using e-cigarettes and noted lack 
of product quality (the devices malfunctioned often, and new 

ones  had  to  be  sent  frequently).  An  author  on  all  of  these 
studies, R. Polosa, served as a consultant for the Arbi Group 
SRL,  the  manufacturer  of  the  Categoria  e-cigarette  used  in 
the study, beginning in February 2011.

Bullen  et  al86  conducted  a  randomized,  controlled,  clini-
cal  trial  of  e-cigarettes  compared  with  medicinal  NRT  in 
Auckland,  New  Zealand.  Adult  smokers  motivated  to  quit 
were  randomized  to  the  3  study  arms  (16-mg  e-cigarette, 
21-mg  NRT  patch,  no-nicotine  e-cigarette).  Voluntary  tele-
phone  counseling  was  offered  to  all  subjects.  Subjects  were 
observed  at  baseline,  1  week  (quit  day),  12  weeks,  and  6 
months.  Fifty-seven  percent  of  participants  in  the  nicotine 
e-cigarettes group reduced their cigarettes per day by ≥50% 
at 6 months compared with 41% in the patch group (P=0.002) 
and 45% in the nonnicotine e-cigarette group (P=0.08). Those 
randomized to the nicotine patch group were less adherent to 
the treatment (46%) than the 16-mg e-cigarette group (78%) 
and  the  no-nicotine  e-cigarette  group  (82%).  Of  note,  the 
study methodology may have introduced bias against success 
in the nicotine patch group because e-cigarettes were mailed 
for free directly to participants randomized to either the nico-
tine or no-nicotine e-cigarette group, whereas participants in 
the  patch  group  were  mailed  cards  redeemable  for  nicotine 
patches at a pharmacy and vouchers to cover the modest fee. 
Therefore,  although  the  protocol  for  providing  the  patches 
represented  “usual  care”  for  New  Zealand  quit-line  callers, 
this procedure may have introduced bias against NRT, making 
it difficult to view the study as a head-to-head comparison of 
e-cigarettes and NRT for cessation. There were no statistically 
significant  differences  in  biochemically  confirmed  (breath 
CO) self-reported continuous abstinence from quit day to the 
6-month  follow-up  between  the  nicotine  e-cigarette  (7.3%), 
nicotine patch (5.8%), and nonnicotine e-cigarette (4.1%).

Neither Capponnetto et al84 nor Bullen et al86 found effects 
of e-cigarette use on quitting beyond what is seen in unassisted 
or low-assistance studies of smokers using NRT to quit.88 In 
determining the effectiveness of smoking cessation therapy, 
active drug is considered efficacious when it outperforms pla-
cebo; therefore, the evidence to date from clinical trials does 
not demonstrate that e-cigarettes are efficacious for cessation. 
However,  it  is  possible  that  e-cigarettes  even  without  nico-
tine act as substitutes for the sensory and behavioral effects 
of conventional cigarettes. If this is the case, the nonnicotine 
placebo e-cigarette would be considered an active treatment 
condition  and,  as  discussed  previously,  has  been  shown  to 
reduce  withdrawal  symptoms.59,60,63,89  Important  limitations 
of  the  current  research  include  the  use  of  e-cigarettes  that 
deliver relatively low levels of nicotine and the provision of 
minimal  behavioral  counseling.  Another  important  limita-
tion of studies assessing the effectiveness of e-cigarettes for 
smoking cessation is that, because they are not approved as 
cessation  therapy,  there  are  no  therapeutic  instructions  for 
using  them  as  replacements  or  to  quit  smoking  (eg,  dosage 
tapering, duration of use, how to combine them with behav-
ioral strategies, guidance for discontinuation).

In contrast to the assumption that e-cigarettes would func-
tion  as  a  better  form  of  NRT,  population-based  studies  that 
reflect real-world e-cigarette use found that e-cigarette use is 
not  associated  with  successful  quitting;  all4,79,80,82  had  point 

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1981

estimates of the odds of quitting of <1.0. The 1 clinical trial 
examining  the  effectiveness  of  e-cigarettes  (both  with  and 
without nicotine) compared with the medicinal nicotine patch 
found  that  e-cigarettes  are  no  better  than  the  nicotine  patch 
and that all treatments produced very modest quit rates with-
out  counseling.86  Taken  together,  these  studies  suggest  that 
e-cigarettes are not associated with successful quitting in gen-
eral population-based samples of smokers.

Health Implications of Cigarette 
Reduction in the Context of Dual Use
Among adults, reductions in cigarettes per day were observed 
in several of the clinical studies83,84,86 and in 1 population-based 
study4 among those who did not quit. Reduction in cigarettes 
smoked per day could have benefit if it promotes subsequent 
cessation, as has been found with NRT,90 but this pattern has 
not yet been seen with e-cigarettes. In the cigarette reduction 
analyses presented in some of the studies, many participants 
were still smoking about half a pack cigarettes per day at the 
end of the study.

Both duration (years of cigarette use) and intensity (ciga-
rettes per day) determine the negative health effects of smok-
ing.91 People who stop smoking at younger ages have lower 
age-adjusted mortality compared with those who continued to 
smoke later into adulthood.92 Findings for decreased smoking 
intensity have been less consistent, with some studies showing 
lower  mortality  with  reduced  daily  cigarette  consumption93 
and others not finding a significant overall survival benefit.94 
The  2014  report  of  the  US  Surgeon  General  concluded  that 
“reducing the number of cigarettes smoked per day is much 
less  effective  than  quitting  entirely  for  avoiding  the  risks  of 
premature death from all smoking-related causes of death.”95 
Use of electronic cigarettes by cigarette smokers to cut down 
on the number of cigarettes smoked per day is likely to have 
much smaller beneficial effects on overall survival compared 
with quitting smoking completely.

This  situation  is  particularly  likely  to  exist  for  cardiovas-
cular  disease  because  of  the  highly  nonlinear  dose-response 
relationship between exposure to fine particles and the risk of 
cardiovascular  disease.53,96  Light  smoking,  even  1  to  4  ciga-
rettes per day, is associated with markedly elevated risk of car-
diovascular disease.97 In addition, e-cigarettes deliver loads of 
fine particles similar to those of conventional cigarettes.

The relative risk of death from lung cancer increases with 
years smoked and cigarettes per day,98 as well as pancreatic 
cancer99  and  esophageal  cancer.100  The  relative  risk  of  both 
lung cancer and bladder cancer levels off after a certain num-
ber  of  cigarettes  per  day,101  suggesting  that  above  a  certain 
intensity, the specific levels of exposure may not cause sig-
nificant differences in risk for these cancers. Doll and Peto102 
found  a  dose-response  relationship  between  duration  of 
smoking and number of cigarettes smoked per day and risk 
of lung cancer, with models suggesting the impact of dura-
tion  to  be  greater  than  that  of  intensity.  Using  participants 
from the Cancer Prevention Study II, Flanders et al103 found a 
greater increase in lung cancer mortality with a greater dura-
tion of cigarette smoking compared with a greater intensity 
of smoking. Overall, these data suggest that lung cancer mor-
tality increases more with additional years of smoking than 

additional cigarettes per day. Thus, if dual use of e-cigarettes 
and  cigarettes  results  in  reductions  in  the  number  of  ciga-
rettes per day for current smokers, any reduction malignancy 
risk  will  be  less  than  proportional  to  the  reduction  in  ciga-
rette  consumption  because  of  the  (likely  larger)  importance 
of duration of smoking.

What to Tell Patients About 
E-Cigarettes and Cessation
First and foremost, clinicians must support a smoker’s quit 
attempt  and  try  to  ensure  any  that  advice  given  does  not 
undermine their motivation to quit. Clinicians should follow 
the  5 A’s  of  evidence-based  treatment:  ask,  advise,  assess, 
assist,  and  arrange.104  They  should  assess  their  patient’s 
motivation and readiness to quit and recommend a treatment 
plan that should include setting a quit date and obtaining ces-
sation counseling and, if appropriate, conventional smoking 
cessation medications. The safest and most proven smoking 
cessation  pharmacotherapies  are  the  nicotine  replacement 
medications  varenicline  and  bupropion,  which  have  been 
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
Referral to a free telephone quit line (eg, 1-800-QUIT-NOW) 
or another counseling support program enhances the effec-
tiveness of smoking cessation medications.104 

If a patient has failed initial treatment, has been intolerant of 
or refuses to use conventional smoking cessation medication, 
and wishes to use e-cigarettes to aid quitting, it is reasonable 
to support the attempt. However, subjects should be informed 
that,  although  e-cigarette  aerosol  is  likely  to  be  much  less 
toxic  than  cigarette  smoking,  the  products  are  unregulated, 
contain toxic chemicals, and have not been proven as cessa-
tion  devices.  The  patient  should  also  be  advised  not  to  use 
the product indoors or around children because studies show 
that bystanders may be exposed to nicotine and other toxins 
(at levels much lower than cigarettes) through passive expo-
sure to the e-cigarette aerosol. Because there are no long-term 
safety studies of e-cigarette use, patients should be urged to 
set a quit date for their e-cigarette use and not plan to use it 
indefinitely. It is also important to stress that patients should 
quit smoking cigarettes entirely as soon as possible because 
continued cigarette smoking, even at reduced levels, contin-
ues  to  impose  tobacco-induced  health  risks  (particularly  for 
cardiovascular disease).

Tobacco Industry and Involvement
By  2013,  the  major  tobacco  companies  had  purchased  or 
developed e-cigarette products (Table 3).

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  cigarette  companies  are 
acquiring  or  producing  e-cigarettes  as  part  of  a  strategy  to 
phase out regular cigarettes, even though some claim to want 
to  participate  in  “harm  reduction.”  Lorillard  CEO  Murray 
Kessler stated in an interview with the Wall Street Journal that 
e-cigarettes will provide smokers an unprecedented chance to 
reduce their risk from cigarettes.105 He also published an op-ed 
in USA Today on September 23, 2013, stating: “E-cigarettes 
might  be  the  most  significant  harm-reduction  option  ever 
made available to smokers.”106 Shortly before this op-ed was 
published,  however,  Lorillard  won  approval  from  the  US 
FDA  to  market  new  nonmentholated  Newport  conventional 

1982 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

Table 3.  Tobacco Companies That Have Acquired or Created 
E-Cigarette Companies and Brands (as of January 2014)

Tobacco Company

Altria Inc

Reynolds American Inc

Lorillard

British American Tobacco

Acquired E-Cigarette 
Company

E-Cigarette Brand(s)

GreenSmoke

Mark Ten

No

Blu Cigs, Inc

CN Creative

Vuse

Blu

Vype

Ruyan

Imperial Tobacco

Dragonite Holdings Ltd

Swisher

No

E-Swisher

E-cigarette indicates electronic cigarette.

cigarettes,  expanding  their  cigarette  line  while  touting  their 
ability to offer a product they claim reduces harm from cig-
arettes.  This  allows  the  cigarette  companies  to  have  it  both 
ways.  (Likewise,  after  evaluating  the  cigarette  companies’ 
internal  documents  and  public  positions  on  snus  [a  form  of 
moist snuff tobacco in a pouch popular in Sweden] as “harm 
reduction”  in  Europe,  Gilmore  et  al107  found  that  they  were 
entering  the  snus  market107  and  adopting  “harm  reduction” 
rhetoric108  to  protect  their  cigarette  business  as  long  as  pos-
sible.) As noted in the 2010 Surgeon General’s report,109 the 
tobacco industry has used every iteration of cigarette design 
to undermine cessation and prevention.

The tobacco companies address e-cigarette issues as part of 
their policy agenda. As they did beginning in the 1980s,110,111 
they  continue  to  engage  in  creating  and  supporting  “smok-
ers’  rights”  groups,  seemingly  independent  groups  that 
interact with consumers directly on political involvement in 
support of their agenda.111 Altria and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco 
Company  maintain  Web  sites  called  Citizens  for  Tobacco 
Rights and Transform Tobacco. E-cigarette news and action 
alerts are featured on the home pages of these websites and 
include  instructions  for  taking  action  against  bills  designed 
to  include  e-cigarette  use  in  smoke-free  laws.  E-cigarette 
companies  engage  in  similar  tactics,  using  the  same  politi-
cal and public relations strategies as the tobacco companies 
(most notably featuring organized “vapers” like the organized 
smokers). They also use social media that is tightly integrated 
with  their  product  marketing  campaigns  to  press  their  pol-
icy  agenda.22  These  strategies  were  successfully  deployed 
in  Europe  to  convince  the  European  Parliament  to  substan-
tially weaken the proposed EU Tobacco Product Directive in 
October 2013.112

Current State of Global 
Regulation (March 2014)
Like  e-cigarette  products,  the  policy  environment  related  to 
e-cigarettes is rapidly developing despite the fact that the sci-
ence  is  just  emerging.  Policy  makers  in  many  countries  are 
under  considerable  pressure  to  provide  regulatory  guidance 
regarding e-cigarettes, often on the basis of the assumption that 
e-cigarettes will contribute to reducing the harms of smoking 
either by serving as a smoking cessation aid or by replacing 
combusted cigarettes. The data reviewed here, together with 
evidence of dual use and youth initiation of e-cigarette use, do 
not demonstrate any hypothesized harm-reducing effect.

Some  countries  (including  Brazil,  Singapore,  Canada, 
the  Seychelles,  and  Uruguay)  have  prohibited  the  sale  of 
 e-cigarettes,  and  many  others  are  developing  policies.1  The 
United  States,  European  Union,  and  United  Kingdom  illus-
trate the range of regulatory approaches being developed.

The United States
In  the  United  States,  as  of  March  2014,  e-cigarette  products 
remained unregulated by any federal authority, particularly the 
US FDA. The Sottera Inc case ruling that was upheld on appeal 
in the US court found that e-cigarettes could be regulated as 
tobacco  products  unless  they  are  marketed  with  health  and 
therapeutic claims.113 The US FDA has stated its intent to assert 
(“deem”) authority over e-cigarettes but has yet to act. The US 
FDA does not have the authority to regulate where e-cigarettes 
are  used;  that  is  the  domain  of  state  and  local  governments, 
where almost all activity on smoke-free laws has occurred. 

Since  e-cigarettes  entered  the  US  market  in  2008,  there 
has been a rapid increase in the number of municipalities and 
states  that  have  adopted  legislation  regulating  where  e-ciga-
rettes can be used and laws restricting sales to minors. As of 
March  2014,  27  states  had  laws  restricting  sales  to  minors, 
1  state  (Minnesota)  taxed  e-cigarettes  as  tobacco  products, 
and  3  states  (New  Jersey,  North  Dakota,  and  Utah)  and 
>100 municipalities (including New York, Los Angeles, San 
Francisco, and Chicago) prohibited the use of e-cigarettes in 
100%   smoke-free  indoor  environments.114  An  additional  9 
states  restricted  e-cigarettes  in  other  venues  such  as  school 
district  property,  Department  of  Corrections/prisons,  public 
educational facilities and grounds, and commuter transit sys-
tems.114  Some  local  and  statewide  smoke-free  laws  enacted 
before  the  introduction  of  e-cigarettes  include  language  that 
could be interpreted as including e-cigarettes.

European Union Tobacco Product Directive
In  February  2014,  the  European  Parliament  approved  a 
revised European Union Tobacco Product Directive that regu-
lates e-cigarettes with nicotine concentrations up to 20 mg/mL 
(an  amount  equal  to  that  in  a  pack  of  cigarettes)  as  tobacco 
products.115  E-cigarettes  with  higher  nicotine  concentrations 
or  intended  therapeutic  uses  will  be  regulated  as  medical 
devices.116  The  directive  stipulates  that  e-cigarettes  must  be 
childproof and that packaging must include information about 
ingredients, adverse effects, and health warnings.115 Refillable 
cartridges are allowed as long as their volume does not exceed 
2 mL (but could be banned by the European Commission if 
at least 3 member states prohibit them on the basis of risks to 
human health).115 Marketing and advertising restrictions will 
mirror those of tobacco products.115

The United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the Medicines and Healthcare Products 
Regulatory Agency announced a plan to regulate e-cigarettes as 
medicines on the basis of the assumption that e-cigarettes func-
tion like NRTs for smokers wishing to cut down or quit.78 As of 
January 2014, Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory 
Agency policies did not include any restrictions on  e-cigarette 
marketing.117  The  antismoking  advocacy  group  Action  on 
Smoking  and  Health  UK  has  announced  that  it  “does  not 

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1983

consider it appropriate to include e-cigarettes under smokefree 
regulations,”118  supporting  one  of  the  e-cigarette  companies’ 
key  marketing  messages  that  e-cigarettes  can  be  used  every-
where without the restrictions and social stigma of smoking.3,119

Policy Recommendations
E-cigarettes deliver lower levels of some of the toxins found 
in  cigarette  smoke.  Main  concerns  about  the  potential  of 
e-cigarettes  to  make  a  contribution  to  reducing  the  harm 
caused by cigarette smoking arise from effects on youth, dual 
use  with  cigarettes  resulting  in  delayed  or  deferred  quitting 
(among both adults and youth), and renormalization of smok-
ing behavior.

The  ultimate  effect  of  e-cigarettes  on  public  health  will 
depend  on  what  happens  in  the  policy  environment.  These 
policies should be implemented to protect public health:

•	 Prohibit the use of e-cigarettes anywhere that use of con-

ventional cigarettes is prohibited.

•	 Prohibit  the  sale  of  e-cigarettes  to  anyone  who  cannot 
legally buy cigarettes or in any venues where sale of con-
ventional cigarettes is prohibited.

•	 Subject e-cigarette marketing to the same level of restric-
tions that apply to conventional cigarettes (including no 
television or radio advertising).

•	 Prohibit  cobranding  e-cigarettes  with  cigarettes  or  mar-

keting in a way that promotes dual use.

•	 Prohibit the use of characterizing flavors in e-cigarettes, 

particularly candy and alcohol flavors.

•	 Prohibit  claims  that  e-cigarettes  are  effective  smoking 
cessation  aids  until  e-cigarette  manufacturers  and  com-
panies provide sufficient evidence that e-cigarettes can be 
used effectively for smoking cessation.

•	 Prohibit any health claims for e-cigarette products until 
and unless approved by regulatory agencies to scientific 
and regulatory standards.

•	 Establish  standards  for  regulating  product  ingredients 

and functioning.

In  addition  to  being  important  in  their  own  right,  should 
these policies be put in place together with polices designed 
to make combustible tobacco products (eg, cigarettes, cigars, 
cigarillos) less desirable and available, it is possible that cur-
rent conventional cigarette smokers who will not quit nicotine 
would  shift  to  e-cigarettes  without  major  dual  use  or  youth 
initiation  to  nicotine  addiction  with  e-cigarettes.  Absent 
this  change  in  the  policy  environment,  it  is  reasonable  to 
assume  that  the  behavior  patterns  that  have  been  observed 
for   e-cigarettes  will  persist,  which  makes  it  unlikely  that 
they will contribute to reducing the harm of tobacco use and 
could increase harm by perpetuating the life of conventional 
cigarettes.

Conclusions
Although most of the discussion of e-cigarettes among health 
authorities has concentrated on the product itself, its potential 
toxicity, and use of e-cigarettes to help people quit smoking, 
the e-cigarette companies have been rapidly expanding using 
aggressive marketing messages similar to those used to promote 
cigarettes in the 1950s and 1960s. E-cigarette advertising is on 

television and radio in many countries that have long banned 
similar advertising for cigarettes and other tobacco products 
and may be indirectly promoting smoking conventional cig-
arettes. Although  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that,  if  existing 
smokers  switched  completely  from  conventional  cigarettes 
(with no other changes in use patterns) to e-cigarettes, there 
would be a lower disease burden caused by nicotine addiction, 
the  evidence  available  at  this  time,  although  limited,  points 
to  high  levels  of  dual  use  of   e-cigarettes  with  conventional 
cigarettes, no proven cessation benefits, and rapidly increas-
ing  youth  initiation  with  e-cigarettes. Although  some  cite  a 
desire to quit smoking by using the e-cigarette, other common 
reasons for using the products are to circumvent smoke-free 
laws and to cut down on conventional cigarettes, which may 
reinforce dual use patterns and delay or deter quitting.

The trajectory of the dual use pattern among adults or chil-
dren is unclear, but studies of youth find that as many as one 
third of youth who use e-cigarettes have never smoked a con-
ventional  cigarette.  Nicotine  is  a  highly  addictive  substance 
with negative effects on animal and human brain development, 
which is still ongoing in adolescence.120–123 Furthermore, high 
rates of dual use may result in greater total public health bur-
den and possibly increased individual risk if a smoker main-
tains an even low-level tobacco cigarette addiction for many 
years instead of quitting.

Although data are limited, it is clear that e-cigarette emissions 
are not merely “harmless water vapor,” as is frequently claimed, 
and can be a source of indoor air pollution. Smoke-free poli-
cies protect nonsmokers from exposure to toxins and encourage 
smoking cessation.124 One hundred percent smoke-free policies 
have larger effects on consumption and smoking prevalence,125 
as well as hospital admissions for myocardial infarction, stroke, 
and  other  cardiovascular  and  pulmonary  emergencies,126  than 
weaker  policies.  Introducing  e-cigarettes  into  clean  air  envi-
ronments may result in population harm if use of the product 
reinforces  the  act  of  smoking  as  socially  acceptable  or  if  use 
undermines the benefits of smoke-free policies.

Acknowledgments
We  thank  the  following  individuals  for  their  advice  and  feedback: 
Cort Anastasio, PhD; John Balmes, MD; Cynthia Hallett, MPH; Sara 
Kalkhoran, MD; Lauren Lempert, JD, MPH; C. Arden Pope III, PhD; 
Martina Pötschke-Langer, MD, MA; Prudence Talbot, PhD; Michael 
Thun, MD; Gemma Vestal, JD, MPH, MBA; and the reviewers solic-
ited by the World Health Organization Tobacco Free Initiative of the 
longer report prepared for it.

Sources of Funding 
This  article  is  a  greatly  condensed  version  of  a  report  prepared  for 
(and  supported  by)  the  World  Health  Organization  Tobacco  Free 
Initiative. Additional support came from the University of California 
Tobacco  Related  Disease  Research  Program  21FT-0040  and  grant 
1P50CA180890  from  the  National  Cancer  Institute  and  Food  and 
Drug  Administration  Center  for  Tobacco  Products.  The  content  is 
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily rep-
resent the official views of the National Institutes of Health, the US 
FDA, or the World Health Organization. Dr Glantz is an American 
Legacy Foundation Distinguished Professor in Tobacco Control.

1984 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

Disclosures
Dr Benowitz is a consultant to several pharmaceutical companies that 
market  smoking  cessation  medications  and  has  been  a  paid  expert 
witness  in  litigation  against  tobacco  companies.  Drs  Grana  and 
Glantz report no conflicts.

References
  1.  Grana R, Benowitz N, Glantz SA. Background paper on E-cigarettes (elec-
tronic nicotine delivery systems). Center for Tobacco Control Research and 
Education, University of California, San Francisco, a WHO Collaborating 
Center  on  Tobacco  Control.  Prepared  for  World  Health  Organization 
Tobacco  Free  Initiative.  December  2013.  http://pvw.escholarship.org/uc/
item/13p2b72n. Accessed March 31, 2014.

  2.  Felberbaum  M.  Old  Tobacco  Playbook  Gets  New  Use  by  E-Cigarettes. 
The  Associated  Press.  2013.  http://bigstory.ap.org/article/old-tobacco-
playbook-gets-new-use-e-cigarettes. Accessed August 16, 2013.

  3.  Grana RA, Ling PM. Smoking revolution? A content analysis of electronic 

cigarette retail websites. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46:395–403.

  4.  Adkison  SE,  O’Connor  RJ,  Bansal-Travers  M,  Hyland  A,  Borland  R, 
Yong HH, Cummings KM, McNeill A, Thrasher JF, Hammond D, Fong 
GT.  Electronic  nicotine  delivery  systems:  international  tobacco  control 
 four-country survey. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44:207–215.

  5.  King BA, Alam S, Promoff G, Arrazola R, Dube SR. Awareness and ever 
use  of  electronic  cigarettes  among  US  adults,  2010–2011.  Nicotine Tob 
Res. 2013;15:1623–1627.

  6.  Dockrell  M,  Morrison  R,  Bauld  L,  McNeill A.  E-cigarettes:  prevalence 
and attitudes in Great Britain. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:1737–1744.
  7.  Pearson  JL,  Richardson  A,  Niaura  RS,  Vallone  DM,  Abrams  DB. 
 e-Cigarette  awareness,  use,  and  harm  perceptions  in  US  adults.  Am  J 
Public Health. 2012;102:1758–1766.

  8.  Regan AK, Promoff G, Dube SR, Arrazola R. Electronic nicotine deliv-
ery  systems:  adult  use  and  awareness  of  the  “e-cigarette”  in  the  USA. 
Tob Control. 2013;22:19–23.

  9.  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Notes  from  the  field:  elec-
tronic  cigarette  use  among  middle  and  high  school  students—United 
States, 2011–2012. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62:729–730.

 10.  Lee  S,  Grana  RA,  Glantz  SA.  Electronic-cigarette  use  among  Korean 
adolescents:  a  cross-sectional  study  of  market  penetration,  dual  use, 
and  relationship  to  quit  attempts  and  former  smoking  [published  online 
ahead  of  print  November  22,  2013].  J  Adolesc  Health.  doi:  10.1016/j. 
jadohealth.2013.11.003.  http://www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X% 
2813%2900748-9. Accessed November 22, 2013.

 11.  Dutra  L,  Glantz  SA.  E-cigarettes  and  conventional  cigarette  use  among 
U.S. adolescents: a cross-sectional study [published online ahead of print 
March  6,  2014].  JAMA  Ped.  doi:  10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.5488. 
http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1840772. 
Accessed March 6, 2013.

 12.  World  Health  Organization.  WHO  Study  Group  on  Tobacco  Product 
Regulation:  report  on  the  scientific  basis  of  tobacco  product  regulation. 
WHO Technical Report Series. 2009:i–21.

 13.  FCTC/COP/5/13. Report: Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems, Including 

Electronic Cigarettes. Seoul, Republic of Korea; 2012.

 14.  Schaller K, Ruppert L, Kahnert S, Bethke C, Nair U, Pötschke-Langer M. 
Electronic Cigarettes: An Overview. Heidelberg, Germany: German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ); 2013.

 15.  Burstyn  I.  Peering  through  the  Mist:  What  Does  the  Chemistry  of 
Contaminants  in  Electronic  Cigarettes  Tell  Us  About  Health  Risks? 
Technical  Report  July-August  2013.  http://publichealth.drexel.edu/~/
media/Files/publichealth/ms08.pdf. Accessed September 23, 2013.

 16.  Trtchounian A, Talbot P. Electronic nicotine delivery systems: is there a 

need for regulation? Tob Control. 2011;20:47–52.

 17.  Givens  A,  Cheng  P-S.  I-Team:  E-cigarettes,  used  to  smoke  marijuana, 
spark  new  concerns.  4  New  York.  October  11,  2013.  http://www. 
nbcnewyork.com/investigations/ECigarettes-Drugs-Marijuana-Vapor-
Pens-Smoking-I-Team-227269001.html. Accessed November 12, 2013.
 18.  Shuman  P,  Burns  M.  Latest  cannibis  craze:  marijuana  known  as  “wax.” 
myFoxLA.com. May 24, 2013. http://www.myfoxla.com/story/22305076/
its-the-latest-cannabis-craze-a-concerntrated-marijuana-known-as-wax. 
Accessed November 12, 2013.

 19.  Williams  M,  Talbot  P.  Variability  among  electronic  cigarettes  in  the 
pressure  drop,  airflow  rate,  and  aerosol  production.  Nicotine  Tob  Res. 
2011;13:1276–1283.

 20.  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Preventing  tobacco  use 
among youth and young adults: a report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, 

GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease 
Prevention and Control, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2012.

 21.  Grana RA, Glantz SA, Ling PM. Electronic nicotine delivery systems in 

the hands of Hollywood. Tob Control. 2011;20:425–426.

 22.  de Andrade M, Hastings G, Angus K. Promotion of electronic cigarettes: 

tobacco marketing reinvented? BMJ. 2013;347:f7473.

 23.  Rooke  C,  Amos  A.  News  media  representations  of  electronic  cigarettes: 
an  analysis  of  newspaper  coverage  in  the  UK  and  Scotland  [published 
online ahead of print July 24, 2013]. Tob Control. doi:10.1136/tobaccocon-
trol-2013–051043. http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2013/07/24/
tobaccocontrol-2013-051043.short. Accessed September 9, 2013.

 24.  Kim AE,  Lee YO,  Shafer  P,  Nonnemaker  J,  Makarenko  O. Adult  smok-
ers’ receptivity to a television advert for electronic nicotine delivery sys-
tems  [published  online  ahead  of  print  October  3,  2013].  Tob  Control. 
doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013–051130. http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/
content/early/2013/10/03/tobaccocontrol-2013-051130.short.  Accessed 
November 21, 2013.

 25.  TNS Opinion & Social. Attitudes of Europeans Towards Tobacco. Special 
Eurobarometer  385,  Wave  Eb77.1  commissioned  by  the  Directorate 
General Health and Consumers of the European Commission;  Brussels, 
Belgium; 2012.

 26.  Etter  JF,  Bullen  C.  A  longitudinal  study  of  electronic  cigarette  users. 

Addict Behav. 2014;39:491–494.

 27.  Douptcheva  N,  Gmel  G,  Studer  J,  Deline  S,  Etter  JF.  Use  of  electronic 
cigarettes  among  young  Swiss  men.  J  Epidemiol  Community  Health. 
2013;67:1075–1076.

 28.  Kralikova  E,  Novak  J,  West  O,  Kmetova  A,  Hajek  P.  Do  e-cigarettes 
have the potential to compete with conventional cigarettes? A survey of 
conventional  cigarette  smokers’  experiences  with  e-cigarettes.  Chest. 
2013;144:1609–1614.

 29.  Etter JF, Bullen C. Electronic cigarette: users profile, utilization, satisfac-

tion and perceived efficacy. Addiction. 2011;106:2017–2028.

 30.  Goniewicz ML, Lingas EO, Hajek P. Patterns of electronic cigarette use 
and user beliefs about their safety and benefits: an internet survey. Drug 
Alcohol Rev. 2013;32:133–140.

 31.  Choi  K,  Forster  JL.  Beliefs  and  experimentation  with  electronic  ciga-
rettes:  a  prospective  analysis  among  young  adults.  Am  J  Prev  Med. 
2014;46:175–178.

 32.  Reddy  A.  Personal  communication:  GYTS  data  Latvia  and  Finland, 

November 12, 2013.

 33.  Goniewicz ML, Zielinska-Danch W. Electronic cigarette use among teen-
agers and young adults in Poland. Pediatrics. 2012;130:e879–e885.
 34.  Utah  Department  of  Health.  Utah  health  status  update:  electronic  ciga-
rette use among Utah students (grades 8, 10, and 12) and adults. Updated 
December  2013.  http://tobacco.ucsf.edu/e-cigarette-use-among-kids-
skyrocketing-utah-levels-much-higher-among-adults. Accessed February 
2, 2014.

 35.  Hadwiger  ME,  Trehy  ML, Ye  W,  Moore  T,  Allgire  J,  Westenberger  B. 
Identification  of  amino-tadalafil  and  rimonabant  in  electronic  ciga-
rette  products  using  high  pressure  liquid  chromatography  with  diode 
array  and  tandem  mass  spectrometric  detection.  J  Chromatogr  A. 
2010;1217:7547–7555.

 36.  Trehy  ML, Ye  W,  Hadwiger  ME,  Moore  TW, Allgire  JF,  Woodruff  JT, 
Ahadi  SS,  Black  JC,  Westenberger  BJ. Analysis  of  electronic  cigarette 
cartridges,  refill  solutions,  and  smoke  for  nicotine  and  nicotine  related 
impurities. J Liq Chromatogr Relat Technol. 2011;34:1442–1458.

 37.  Goniewicz  ML,  Kuma  T,  Gawron  M,  Knysak  J,  Kosmider  L.  Nicotine 

levels in electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:158–166.

 38.  Cameron JM, Howell DN, White JR, Andrenyak DM, Layton ME, Roll 
JM. Variable and potentially fatal amounts of nicotine in e-cigarette nico-
tine solutions. Tob Control. 2014;23:77–78.

 39.  Schober  W,  Szendrei  K,  Matzen  W,  Osiander-Fuchs  H,  Heitmann 
D,  Schettgen  T,  Jorres  RA,  Fromme  H.  Use  of  electronic  cigarettes 
 (e-cigarettes)  impairs  indoor  air  quality  and  increases  FeNO  levels  of 
e-cigarette  consumers  [published  online  ahead  of  print  December  6, 
2013]. Int J Hyg Environ Health. doi: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.11.003. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.11.003. Accessed February 10, 2014. 
 40.  Goniewicz ML, Hajek P, McRobbie H. Nicotine content of electronic cig-
arettes, its release in vapour and its consistency across batches: regulatory 
implications. Addiction. 2014;109:500–507.

 41.  Goniewicz ML, Knysak J, Gawron M, Kosmider L, Sobczak A, Kurek J, 
Prokopowicz A, Jablonska-Czapla M, Rosik-Dulewska C, Havel C. Levels 
of selected carcinogens and toxicants in vapour from electronic cigarettes. 
Tob Control. 2014;23:133–139.

Grana et al 

  E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 

  1985

 42.  Kim HJ, Shin HS. Determination of tobacco-specific nitrosamines in replace-
ment  liquids  of  electronic  cigarettes  by  liquid   chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A. 2013;1291:48–55.

 43.  Bahl V, Lin S, Xu N, Davis B, Wang YH, Talbot P. Comparison of elec-
tronic cigarette refill fluid cytotoxicity using embryonic and adult models. 
Reprod Toxicol. 2012;34:529–537.

 44.  Romagna  G,  Allifranchini  E,  Bocchietto  E,  Todeschi  S,  Esposito  M, 
Farsalinos  KE.  Cytotoxicity  evaluation  of  electronic  cigarette  vapor 
extract on cultured mammalian fibroblasts (ClearStream-LIFE): compari-
son with tobacco cigarette smoke extract. Inhal Toxicol. 2013;25:354–361.
 45.  Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Allifranchini E, Ripamonti E, Bocchietto E, 
Todeschi  S,  Tsiapras  D,  Kyrzopoulos  S, Voudris V.  Comparison  of  the 
cytotoxic  potential  of  cigarette  smoke  and  electronic  cigarette  vapour 
extract  on  cultured  myocardial  cells.  Int  J  Environ  Res  Public  Health. 
2013;10:5146–5162.

 65.  Nides MA, Leischow SJ, Bhatter M, Simmons M. Nicotine blood levels 
and short-term smoking reduction with an electronic nicotine delivery sys-
tem. Am J Health Beh. 2014;38:265–274.

 66.  Sciencelab.com,  Inc.  Material  Data  Safety  Sheet:  Propylene  Glycol. 

Updated May 21, 2013. Sciencelab.com, Inc., Houston, TX.

 67.  Dow Chemical Co. Product Safety Assessment (PSA): propylene glycol. 
2013.  http://www.dow.com/productsafety/finder/prog.htm#HealthInfo. 
Accessed November 21, 2013.

 68.  The  American  Chemistry  Council.  Propylene  glycol:  considerations 
against use in theatrical fogs. July 2001. http://www.lyondellbasell.com/
techlit/techlit/2280.pdf. Accessed November 21, 2013.

 69.  Laino T, Tuma C, Moor P, Martin E, Stolz S, Curioni A. Mechanisms of pro-
pylene glycol and triacetin pyrolysis. J Phys Chem A. 2012;116:4602–4609.
 70.  US  Environmental  Protection  Agency.  Acrolein.  http://www.epa.gov/

ttnatw01/hlthef/acrolein.html. Accessed November 24, 2013.

 46.  Schripp T,  Markewitz  D,  Uhde  E,  Salthammer T.  Does  e-cigarette  con-

 71.  Henderson TR, Clark CR, Marshall TC, Hanson RL, CH H. Heat degrada-

sumption cause passive vaping? Indoor Air. 2013;23:25–31.

 47.  Flouris  AD,  Chorti  MS,  Poulianiti  KP,  Jamurtas  AZ,  Kostikas  K, 
Tzatzarakis  MN, Wallace  Hayes A, Tsatsakis AM,  Koutedakis Y. Acute 
impact of active and passive electronic cigarette smoking on serum coti-
nine and lung function. Inhal Toxicol. 2013;25:91–101.

 48.  Armitage AK, Dollery CT, George CF, Houseman TH, Lewis PJ, Turner 
DM. Absorption and metabolism of nicotine from cigarettes. Br Med J. 
1975;4:313–316.

 49.  Czogala  J,  Goniewicz  ML,  Fidelus  B,  Zielinska-Danch  W,  Travers 
MJ,  Sobczak  A.  Secondhand  exposure  to  vapors  from  electronic  ciga-
rettes  [published  online  ahead  of  print  December  11,  2013].  Nicotine 
Tob  Res.  doi:  10.1093/ntr/ntt203.  http://ntr.oxfordjournals.org/content/
early/2013/12/10/ntr.ntt203.long. Accessed February 12, 2014.

 50.  Ostro B, Feng WY, Broadwin R, Green S, Lipsett M. The effects of com-
ponents of fine particulate air pollution on mortality in California: results 
from CALFINE. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:13–19.

 51.  Secondhand Smoke Exposure and Cardiovascular Effects: Making Sense 

of the Evidence. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 2010.

 52.  Brook  RD,  Rajagopalan  S,  Pope  CA,  Brook  JR,  Bhatnagar  A,  Diez-
Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker RV, Mittleman MA. Particulate 
matter  air  pollution  and  cardiovascular  disease:  an  update  to  the  sci-
entific  statement  from  the  American  Heart  Association.  Circulation. 
2010;121:2331–2378.

 53.  Pope CA 3rd, Burnett RT, Krewski D, Jerrett M, Shi Y, Calle EE, Thun 
MJ.  Cardiovascular  mortality  and  exposure  to  airborne  fine  particulate 
matter and cigarette smoke: shape of the exposure-response relationship. 
Circulation. 2009;120:941–948.

 54.  Mehta S, Shin H, Burnett R, North T, Cohen AJ. Ambient particulate air 
pollution and acute lower respiratory infections: a systematic review and 
implications for estimating the global burden of disease. Air Qual Atmos 
Health. 2013:1–15.

 55.  Fuoco FC, Buonanno G, Stabile L, Vigo P. Influential parameters on par-
ticle concentration and size distribution in the mainstream of e-cigarettes. 
Environ Pollut. 2014;184:523–529.

 56.  Ingebrethsen BJ, Cole SK, Alderman SL. Electronic cigarette aerosol par-
ticle size distribution measurements. Inhal Toxicol. 2012;24:976–984.
 57.  Zhang Y, Sumner W, Chen DR. In vitro particle size distributions in elec-
tronic and conventional cigarette aerosols suggest comparable deposition 
patterns. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:501–508.

 58.  Williams M, Villarreal A, Bozhilov K, Lin S, Talbot P. Metal and silicate 
particles including nanoparticles are present in electronic cigarette carto-
mizer fluid and aerosol. PLoS One. 2013;8:e57987.

 59.  Vansickel  AR,  Cobb  CO,  Weaver  MF,  Eissenberg  TE.  A  clinical  labo-
ratory  model  for  evaluating  the  acute  effects  of  electronic  “cigarettes”: 
nicotine delivery profile and cardiovascular and subjective effects. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1945–1953.

 60.  Bullen C, McRobbie H, Thornley S, Glover M, Lin R, Laugesen M. Effect 
of an electronic nicotine delivery device (e cigarette) on desire to smoke 
and  withdrawal,  user  preferences  and  nicotine  delivery:  randomised 
 cross-over trial. Tob Control. 2010;19:98–103.

 61.  Etter JF, Bullen C. Saliva cotinine levels in users of electronic cigarettes. 

Eur Respir J. 2011;38:1219–1220.

 62.  Vansickel AR, Eissenberg T. Electronic cigarettes: effective nicotine deliv-
ery after acute administration. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:267–270.

 63.  Dawkins L, Corcoran O. Acute electronic cigarette use: nicotine delivery 
and subjective effects in regular users. Psychopharmacology. 2013:1–7.
 64.  Dawkins L, Turner J, Hasna S, Soar K. The electronic-cigarette: effects 
on desire to smoke, withdrawal symptoms and cognition. Addict Behav. 
2012;37:970–973.

tion studies of solar heat transfer fluids Solar Energy. 1981;27:121–128.
 72.  Chen  IL.  FDA  summary  of  adverse  events  on  electronic  cigarettes. 

Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:615–616.

 73.  CBS News. Electronic cigarette explodes in man’s mouth, causes serious 
injuries.  February  16,  2012.  http://www.cbsnews.com/news/electronic-
cigarette-explodes-in-mans-mouth-causes-serious-injuries/.  Accessed 
November 24, 2013.

 74.  Strickland J. Woman says e-cigarette exploded, shot flames 4 feet across 
living room. WSB-TV Atlanta. 2013. http://www.wsbtv.com/news/news/
local/woman-says-e-cigarette-exploded-shot-flames-4-feet/nZkCX/.
 75.  Vardavas  CI,  Anagnostopoulos  N,  Kougias  M,  Evangelopoulou  V, 
Connolly  GN,  Behrakis  PK.  Short-term  pulmonary  effects  of  using  an 
electronic cigarette: impact on respiratory flow resistance, impedance, and 
exhaled nitric oxide. Chest. 2012;141:1400–1406.

 76.  Flouris AD, Poulianiti KP, Chorti MS, Jamurtas AZ, Kouretas D, Owolabi 
EO, Tzatzarakis MN, Tsatsakis AM, Koutedakis Y. Acute effects of elec-
tronic  and  tobacco  cigarette  smoking  on  complete  blood  count.  Food 
Chem Toxicol. 2012;50:3600–3603.

 77.  McAuley TR, Hopke PK, Zhao J, Babaian S. Comparison of the effects of 
e-cigarette vapor and cigarette smoke on indoor air quality. Inhal Toxicol. 
2012;24:850–857.

 78.  Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. The Regulation 
of Nicotine Containing Products (NCPS). London, UK: Public Summary 
Report,  Medicines  and  Healthcare  Products  Regulatory Agency;  June 
12, 2013.

 79.  Grana R, Popova L, Ling P. A longitudinal analysis of electronic ciga-
rette use and smoking cessation [published online ahead of print March 
24,  2014].  JAMA  Int  Med.  doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.187. 
http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1846627. 
Accessed March 24, 2014.

 80.  Vickerman KA, Carpenter KM, Altman T, Nash CM, Zbikowski SM. Use 
of  electronic  cigarettes  among  state  tobacco  cessation  quitline  callers. 
Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:1787–1791.

 81.  Choi K, Forster JL. Response to Letter to the Editor Regarding “Beliefs 
and Experimentation with Electronic Cigarettes: A Prospective Analysis 
Among Young Adults.” Am J Prev Med. In press.

 82.  Popova L, Ling PM. Alternative tobacco product use and smoking cessa-

tion: a national study. Am J Public Health. 2013;103:923–930.

 83.  Polosa R, Caponnetto P, Morjaria JB, Papale G, Campagna D, Russo C. 
Effect of an electronic nicotine delivery device (e-cigarette) on smoking 
reduction and cessation: a prospective 6-month pilot study. BMC Public 
Health. 2011;11:786.

 84.  Caponnetto P, Campagna D, Cibella F, Morjaria JB, Caruso M, Russo C, 
Polosa R. EffiCiency and Safety of an eLectronic cigAreTte (ECLAT) as 
tobacco cigarettes substitute: a prospective 12-month randomized control 
design study. PLoS One. 2013;8:e66317.

 85.  Caponnetto P, Auditore R, Russo C, Cappello GC, Polosa R. Impact of an 
electronic cigarette on smoking reduction and cessation in schizophrenic 
smokers:  a  prospective  12-month  pilot  study.  Int  J  Environ  Res  Public 
Health. 2013;10:446–461.

 86.  Bullen  C,  Howe  C,  Laugesen  M,  McRobbie  H,  Parag  V,  Williman  J, 
Walker N. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2013;382:1629–1637.

 87.  Polosa R, Morjaria JB, Caponnetto P, Campagna D, Russo C, Alamo A, 
Amaradio  M,  Fisichella  A.  Effectiveness  and  tolerability  of  electronic 
cigarette in real-life: a 24-month prospective observational study. Intern 
Emerg Med. 2013:1–10.

 88.  Hughes JR, Shiffman S, Callas P, Zhang J. A meta-analysis of the efficacy 
of over-the-counter nicotine replacement. Tob Control. 2003;12:21–27.

1986 

  Circulation 

  May 13, 2014

  89.  Eissenberg T. Electronic nicotine delivery devices: ineffective nicotine 
delivery and craving suppression after acute administration. Tob Control. 
2010;19:87–88.

  90.  Moore  D,  Aveyard  P,  Connock  M,  Wang  D,  Fry-Smith  A,  Barton  P. 
Effectiveness  and  safety  of  nicotine  replacement  therapy  assisted 
reduction to stop smoking: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2009;338:b1024.

  91.  Godtfredsen  N,  Osler  M,  Vestbo  J,  Andersen  I,  Prescott  E.  Smoking 
reduction,  smoking  cessation,  and  incidence  of  fatal  and  non-fatal 
myocardial  infarction  in  Denmark  1976–1998:  a  pooled  cohort  study. 
J Epidemiol Commun Health. 2003;57:412–416.

  92.  Jha P, Ramasundarahettige C, Landsman V, Rostron B, Thun M, Anderson 
RN, McAfee T, Peto R. 21st-Century hazards of smoking and benefits of 
cessation in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:341–350.
  93.  Gerber Y, Myers V, Goldbourt U. Smoking reduction at midlife and life-
time mortality risk in men: a prospective cohort study. Am J Epidemiol. 
2012;175:1006–1012.

  94.  Tverdal A, Bjartveit K. Health consequences of reduced daily cigarette 

consumption. Tob Control. 2006;15:472–480.

  95.  US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences 
of  Smoking:  50 Years  of  Progress:  A  Report  of  the  Surgeon  General. 
Atlanta,  GA:  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  National 
Center on Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on 
Smoking and Health; 2014.

  96.  Barnoya  J,  Glantz  SA.  Cardiovascular  effects  of  secondhand  smoke: 

nearly as large as smoking. Circulation. 2005;111:2684–2698.

  97.  Bjartveit K, Tverdal A. Health consequences of smoking 1-4 cigarettes 

per day. Tob Control. 2005;14:315–320.

  98.  Thun  MJ,  Carter  BD,  Feskanich  D,  Freedman  ND,  Prentice  R,  Lopez 
AD, Hartge P, Gapstur SM. 50-Year trends in smoking-related mortality 
in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:351–364.

  99.  Lynch  SM, Vrieling A,  Lubin  JH,  Kraft  P,  Mendelsohn  JB,  Hartge  P, 
Canzian F, Steplowski E, Arslan AA, Gross M, Helzlsouer K, Jacobs EJ, 
LaCroix A, Petersen G, Zheng W, Albanes D, Amundadottir L, Bingham 
SA, Boffetta P, Boutron-Ruault MC, Chanock SJ, Clipp S, Hoover RN, 
Jacobs K, Johnson KC, Kooperberg C, Luo J, Messina C, Palli D, Patel 
AV, Riboli E, Shu XO, Rodriguez Suarez L, Thomas G, Tjønneland A, 
Tobias GS, Tong E, Trichopoulos D, Virtamo J, Ye W, Yu K, Zeleniuch-
Jacquette  A,  Bueno-de-Mesquita  HB, 
 Stolzenberg-Solomon  RZ. 
Cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pan-
creatic cancer cohort consortium. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;170:403–413.

 100.  Pandeya N, Williams GM, Sadhegi S, Green AC, Webb PM, Whiteman 
DC. Associations  of  duration,  intensity,  and  quantity  of  smoking  with 
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2008;168:105–114.

 101.  Vineis P, Kogevinas M, Simonato L, Brennan P, Boffetta P.  Levelling-off 
of  the  risk  of  lung  and  bladder  cancer  in  heavy  smokers:  an  analysis 
based  on  multicentric  case-control  studies  and  a  metabolic  interpreta-
tion. Mutat Res. 2000;463:103–110.

 102.  Doll R, Peto R. Cigarette smoking and bronchial carcinoma: dose and 
time  relationships  among  regular  smokers  and  lifelong  non-smokers. 
J Epidemiol Community Health. 1978;32:303–313.

 103.  Flanders  WD,  Lally  CA,  Zhu  BP,  Henley  SJ,  Thun  MJ.  Lung  cancer 
mortality  in  relation  to  age,  duration  of  smoking,  and  daily  cigarette 
consumption:  results  from  Cancer  Prevention  Study  II.  Cancer  Res. 
2003;63:6556–6562.

 104.  Fiore M. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update: Clinical 

Practice Guideline. Darby, PA: DIANE Publishing; 2008.

 105.  Esterl M. Lorillard isn’t backing away from menthol or e-cigarettes. Wall 
Street J. August 27, 2013. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001
424127887324906304579038844211701578.  Accessed  November  24, 
2013.

 106.  Kessler  MS.  E-cigarettes  could  reduce  harm:  opposing  view:  regula-
tory  actions,  including  tax  policy  should  encourage  cigarette  smokers 
to  switch.  USA Today.  September  22,  2013.  http://www.usatoday.com/
story/opinion/2013/09/22/electronic-cigarettes-blu-ecigs-editorials-
debates/2850859/. Accessed November 24, 2013.

 107.  Peeters  S,  Gilmore  AB.  Transnational  tobacco  company  interests  in 
smokeless  tobacco  in  Europe:  analysis  of  internal  industry  documents 
and contemporary industry materials. PLoS Med. 2013;10:e1001506.
 108.  Peeters  S,  Gilmore  AB.  Understanding  the  emergence  of  the  tobacco 
industry’s  use  of  the  term  tobacco  harm  reduction  in  order  to  inform 

public  health  policy  [published  online  ahead  of  print  January  22, 
2014].  Tob  Control.  doi:  10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051502.  http:// 
tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2014/01/22/tobaccocontrol-
 2013-051502.long. Accessed February 2, 2014.

 109.  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  How  Tobacco 
Smoke  Causes  Disease:  The  Biology  and  Behavioral  Basis  for 
 Smoking-Attributable  Disease:  A  Report  of  the  Surgeon  General. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  National  Center  for  Chronic  Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2010.
 110.  Samuels  B,  Glantz  SA.  The  politics  of  local  tobacco  control.  JAMA. 

1991;266:2110–2117.

 111.  Fallin  A,  Grana  R,  Glantz  SA.  “To  quarterback  behind  the  scenes, 
third-party  efforts”:  the  tobacco  industry  and  the  tea  party  [published 
online  ahead  of  print  February  20,  2013].  Tob  Control.  doi:10.1136/
tobaccocontrol-2012–050815.  http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/
early/2013/02/20/tobaccocontrol-2012-050815.long.

 112.  Higgins  A.  Aided  by  army  of  “’vapers,”  e-cigarette 

indus-
try  woos  and  wins  Europe.  The  New  York  Times.  November  9,  
2013. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/10/world/europe/aided-by- 
army-of-vapers-e-cigarette-industry-woos-and-wins-europe.
html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&seid=auto&smid=tw-nytimeshealth. 
Accessed November 12, 2013.

 113.  Sottera, Inc. v Food & Drug Administration, 627 F.3d 891 (2010).
 114.  American  Nonsmokers’  Rights  Foundation.  U.S.  state  and  local  laws 
regulating use of electronic cigarettes October 1, 2013. http://no-smoke.
org/pdf/ecigslaws.pdf. Accessed December 14, 2013.

 115.  European  Parliament  and  European  Council  of 

the  European 
Union.  Directive  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on 
the  Approximation  of  the  Laws,  Regulations,  and  Administrative 
Provisions  of  the  Member  States  concerning  the  manufacture,  pre-
sentation  and  sale  of  tobacco  and  related  products.  Pe-Cons  No/
Yy  -  2012/0366  (Cod).  February  26,  2014.  http://www.europarl.
europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=REPORT&reference=A7-2013-
0276&format=XML&language=EN. Accessed March 25, 2014..
 116.  European  Commission.  Memo:  questions  &  answers:  new  rules  for 
tobacco  products.  March  5,  2014.  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_
MEMO-14-134_en.htm. Accessed March 5, 2014.

 117.  Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. The regulation of 
nicotine containing products: questions and answers. 2013. http://www.
mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/comms-ic/documents/ websiteresources/
con286835.pdf. Accessed October 4, 2013.

 118.  Action on Smoking and Health. Electronic cigarettes. ash briefing. June 
2013.  http://www.ash.org.uk/files/documents/ASH_715.pdf.  Accessed 
October 4, 2013.

 119.  McKee M. E-cigarettes and the marketing push that surprised everyone. 

BMJ. 2013;347:f5780.

 120.  Dwyer JB, Broide RS, Leslie FM. Nicotine and brain development. Birth 

Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2008;84:30–44.

 121.  Liao  C-Y,  Chen Y-J,  Lee  J-F,  Lu  C-L,  Chen  C-H.  Cigarettes  and  the 
developing  brain:  picturing  nicotine  as  a  neuroteratogen  using  clinical 
and preclinical studies. Tzu Chi Med J. 2012;24:157–161.

 122.  Lichtensteiger  W,  Ribary  U,  Schlumpf  M,  Odermatt  B,  Widmer  HR. 
Prenatal adverse effects of nicotine on the developing brain. Prog Brain 
Res. 1988;73:137–157.

 123.  Longo CA, Fried PA, Cameron I, Smith AM. The long-term effects of 
prenatal  nicotine  exposure  on  response  inhibition:  an  fMRI  study  of 
young adults. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2013;39:9–18.

 124.  US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences 
of  Involuntary  Exposure  to  Tobacco  Smoke:  A  Report  of  the  Surgeon 
General Washington,  DC:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services 
PHS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for 
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office of Smoking 
and Health; 2006.

 125.  Fichtenberg CM, Glantz SA. Effect of smoke-free workplaces on smok-

ing behaviour: systematic review. BMJ. 2002;325:188.

 126.  Tan  CE,  Glantz  SA.  Association  between  smoke-free  legislation  and 
hospitalizations for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and respiratory diseases: a 
meta-analysis. Circulation. 2012;126:2177–2183. 

KEY  WORDS:  adolescent  ◼  particulate  matter  ◼  public  policy  ◼  smoking 

